             THE HUNTER WHO SECURED THE BEAR CEREMONY


A man was out hunting when there was snow on the ground. As he walked
along a hillside he slipped and fell off. Below was a bear's den and he
fell right into it. When the female bear discovered him she jumped
around and said, “Wau, wau, wau, wau.” “Please do not act like that,
grandmother,” he said. “It seems I fell in here.” He remained there four
days without anything to eat. “Are you not hungry?” the bear asked. “I
am hungry,” he replied, “but what is there I can eat?” She shook herself
and cactus fruit rained down from her. After a second period of fasting,
the same question was asked and the same reply given. When the bear
shook herself, juniper berries fell. The third time it was white oak
acorns, and the fourth time, manzanita berries.

After that she said there were two persons living across the valley and
that they would go there to visit. She also said the visit would be
dangerous, for she had in mind bears and a bear's camp. The bear told
the man to remain between her hind legs during the period of danger.

When they entered the bear's house and the hosts became aware of the
man's presence, they became aroused and growled, “Wau, wau, wau.” The
man remained between the hind legs of his companion who reached around
with her front legs and defended him. “He has been with me a long time
and he is our friend,” she said to the others.

Next they all went to a camp where there were three bears and there
again the same things happened and the same expressions were used. From
there they went with him to a camp where there were four bears. He was
protected at that camp as on the former occasions and was introduced as
a friend.

Accompanied by the bears, he went back to the camp at which he had first
arrived. He had been gone a year. He came back to his own people. From
this man there came to be bear songs and medicinemen with bear power.






