The Magic Rope








On discovering that they had been deceived, the Demons made complaint
to their chiefs, who informed them that Sun, by pretending to be one
of the Immortals, had outwitted them. They had now lost two out of
their five magic treasures. There remained three, the magic sword,
the magic palm fan, and the magic rope. "Go," said they, "and invite
our dear grandmother to come and dine on human flesh." Personating
one of the Demons, Sun himself went on this errand. He told the old
lady that he wanted her to bring with her the magic rope, with which
to catch Sun. She was delighted, and set out in her chair carried by
two fairies.

When they had gone some few _li_, Sun killed the ladies, and then saw
that they were foxes. He took the magic rope, and thus had three of
the magic treasures. Having changed the dead so that they looked like
living creatures, he returned to the Lotus Cave. Many small demons came
running up, saying that the old lady had been slain. The Demon-king,
alarmed, proposed to release the whole party. But his younger brother
said: "No, let me fight Sun. If I win, we can eat them; if I fail,
we can let them go."

After thirty bouts Sun lost the magic rope, and the Demon lassoed him
with it and carried him to the cave, and took back the magic gourd
and vase. Sun now transformed himself into two false demons. One he
placed instead of himself in the lasso bound to a pillar, and then
went and reported to the second Demon-chief that Sun was struggling
hard, and that he should be bound with a stronger rope lest he make
his escape. Thus, by this strategy, Sun obtained possession of the
magic rope again. By a similar trick he also got back the magic gourd
and vase.










