The Dragon-kings








The Sea-dragon Kings live in gorgeous palaces in the depths of the
sea, where they feed on pearls and opals. There are five of these
divinities, the chief being in the centre, and the other four occupying
the north, the west, the south, and the east. Each is a league in
length, and so bulky that in shifting its posture it tosses one
mountain against another. It has five feet, one of them being in the
middle of its belly, and each foot is armed with five sharp claws. It
can reach into the heavens, and stretch itself into all quarters of
the sea. It has a glowing armour of yellow scales, a beard under its
long snout, a hairy tail, and shaggy legs. Its forehead projects over
its blazing eyes, its ears are small and thick, its mouth gaping,
its tongue long, and its teeth sharp. Fish are boiled by the blast of
its breath, and roasted by the fiery exhalations of its body. When it
rises to the surface the whole ocean surges, waterspouts foam, and
typhoons rage. When it flies, wingless, through the air, the winds
howl, torrents of rain descend, houses are unroofed, the firmament
is filled with a din, and whatever lies along its route is swept away
with a roar in the hurricane created by the speed of its passage.

The five Sea-dragon Kings are all immortal. They know each other's
thoughts, plans, and wishes without intercommunication. Like all the
other gods they go once a year to the superior Heavens, to make an
annual report to the Supreme Ruler; but they go in the third month,
at which time none of the other gods dare appear, and their stay
above is but brief. They generally remain in the depths of the ocean,
where their courts are filled with their progeny, their dependents,
and their attendants, and where the gods and genii sometimes visit
them. Their palaces, of divers coloured transparent stones, with
crystal doors, are said to have been seen in the early morning by
persons gazing into the deep waters.









