A Drought and its Cause








While everything was thus tranquil, a sudden and untoward event
occurred which spread dismay and consternation on all sides. One day
when the Prince went into the hall of audience one of his ministers
reported that "the wells are thirsty and the rivers dried up"--there
was no water, and the people were all in the greatest alarm. The
Prince at once called his counsellors together to devise some means
of remedying this disaster and causing the water to return to the
wells and springs, but no one could suggest a suitable plan.

It is necessary to explain the cause of this scarcity of water. There
was a dragon's cave outside the east gate of the city at a place
called Lei-chen K'ou, 'Thunder-clap Mouth' or 'Pass' (the name of a
village). The dragon had not been seen for myriads of years, yet it
was well known that he lived there.

In digging out the earth to build the wall the workmen had broken into
this dragon's cave, little thinking of the consequences which would
result. The dragon was exceedingly wroth and determined to shift his
abode, but the she-dragon said: "We have lived here thousands of years,
and shall we suffer the Prince of Yen to drive us forth thus? If we
_do_ go we will collect all the water, place it in our _yin-yang_
baskets , and at midnight we will appear in a
dream to the Prince, requesting permission to retire. If he gives us
permission to do so, and allows us also to take our baskets of water
with us, he will fall into our trap, for we shall take the waler with
his own consent,"







