The King Cured








On the arrival of the envoys Shan Ts'ai met them in the mutilated form
of Miao Shan, and he bade them cut off his right hand, pluck out his
right eye, and put them on a plate. At the sight of the four bleeding
wounds Liu Ch'in could not refrain from calling out indignantly:
"This priest is a wicked man, thus to make a martyr of a woman in
order to obtain the succession!"

Having thus spoken, he left with his companion for the kingdom of
Hsing Lin. On their return the King was overwhelmed with joy. The
priest quickly prepared the ointment, and the King, without delay,
applied it to his right side. At once the ulcers disappeared like the
darkness of night before the rising sun. The whole Court congratulated
the King and eulogized the priest. The King conferred upon the latter
the title Priest of the Brilliant Eye. He fell on his face to return
thanks, and added: "I, a poor priest, have left the world, and have
only one wish, namely, that your Majesty should govern your subjects
with justice and sympathy and that all the officials of the realm
should prove themselves men of integrity. As for me, I am used to
roaming about. I have no desire for any royal estate. My happiness
exceeds all earthly joys."

Having thus spoken, the priest waved the sleeve of his cloak, a cloud
descended from Heaven, and seating himself upon it he disappeared
in the sky. From the cloud a note containing the following words was
seen to fall: "I am one of the Teachers of the West. I came to cure
the King's illness, and so to glorify the True Doctrine."










