THE BIRD WIFE


Itajung, one of the Inuit tribe, was vexed because a young woman would
not marry him, so he left his home and traveled far away into the land
of the birds. He came to a small lake in which many geese were
swimming. On the shore he saw a great many boots. He cautiously crept
near and stole a pair and hid them.

Presently the birds came out of the water, and finding a pair of boots
gone they were alarmed, and quickly forming into two long lines with
their leader at the point where the lines met, they flew away crying,
"_Honk! Honk! Honk!_"

But one of the flock remained behind crying, "I want my boots! I want
my boots!"

Itajung came forth from his hiding-place and said, "I will give you
your boots if you will become my wife."

"That I will not do," she replied.

"Very well," he said, and turned around to go away.

"I don't want to, but I will be your wife if you will bring back my
boots," she called.

He came back and gave her the boots, and when she put them on she was
changed into a woman.

They walked away together, and wandered down to the seaside and, as
she liked to live near the water, they settled in a large village by
the sea. Here they lived for several years and had a son. Itajung
became a highly respected man, for he was by far the best whaler in
all the Inuit tribe.

One day they killed a whale and were busy cutting it up and carrying
the meat and blubber to their homes. Many of the women were helping,
but though Itajung was working very hard, his wife stood lazily
looking on.

"Come and help us," he called to her.

"My food is not from the sea," she replied. "My food is from the land.
I will not eat the meat of a whale; neither will I help."

"You must eat it; it will fill your stomach," said he.

She began to cry, and said, "I will not eat it. I will not soil my
nice white clothing."

She went to the beach and searched for feathers. When she found some,
she put them between her fingers and the fingers of her child. They
were both turned into geese and flew away. When the Inuit saw this
they cried, "Itajung, your wife is flying away."

Itajung became very sad. He no longer cared for the meat and blubber,
nor for the whales spouting near the shore. He followed in the
direction his wife had taken, and went over all the land in search of
her.

After traveling for many weary months, he came to a river where a man
with a large axe was chopping chips from a piece of wood, and as fast
as he chopped them they were turned into salmon and slipped out of the
man's hands into the river and swam down to a large lake near by. The
name of the man was Small Salmon.

As Itajung looked at the man he was frightened almost to death; for
the back of the man was entirely hollow, and Itajung could see right
through him and out at the other side. He was so scared that he kept
very still and crept back and away out around him. He wanted to ask if
the man had seen his wife, for that was what he asked everyone he came
to. So he went around and came from the opposite direction, facing the
man.

When Small Salmon saw him approaching he stopped chopping and asked,
"Which way did you approach me?"

"I came from that direction," said Itajung, pointing in the way he had
last approached.

"That is lucky for you, for if you had come the other way and had seen
my back, I should have killed you at once with my hatchet."

"I am glad I don't have to die," said Itajung. "But haven't you seen
my wife? She left me and came this way."

"Yes, I saw her. Do you see that little island in the large lake? That
is where she lives now, and she has taken another husband."

"Oh, I can never reach her," said Itajung in despair. "I have no boat
and do not know how to reach the island."

"I will help you," said Small Salmon kindly. "Come down to the beach
with me. Here is the backbone of a salmon. Now shut your eyes. The
backbone will turn into a kayak and carry you safely to the island.
But mind you keep your eyes shut. If you open them the kayak will
upset."

"I will obey," said Itajung.

He closed his eyes, the backbone became a kayak, and away he sped over
the water. He heard no splashing and was anxious to know if he really
was moving, so he peeped open his eyes a trifle.

At once the boat began to swing violently, but he quickly shut his
eyes, and it went on steadily, and he soon landed on the island.

There he saw a hut and his son playing on the beach near it. The boy
on looking up saw and recognized him, and ran to his mother, crying:

"Mother, Father is here and is coming to our hut."

"Go back to your play," she said; "your father is far away and cannot
find us."

The lad went back, but again he ran in, saying:

"Mother, Father is here and is coming to our hut."

Again she sent him away; but he soon returned, saying: "Father is
right here."

He had scarcely said it when Itajung opened the door. When the new
husband saw him he said to his wife, "Open that box in the corner of
the hut."

She did so, and a great quantity of feathers flew out and stuck fast
to them. The hut disappeared. The woman, her new husband, and the
child were transformed into geese and flew away, leaving Itajung
standing alone.





