RAVEN AND THE GEESE


For a long time Raven lived alone, but finally became tired of it and
decided to take a wife. It was late in the fall and he noticed that
the birds were going south in large flocks. He flew away and stopped
directly in the path taken by geese and other wild fowl on their way
to the land of summer.

As he sat there he saw a pretty young goose coming near. He hid his
face by looking at his feet, so that she would not know but that he
was a black goose, and called out, "Who wishes me for a husband? I am
a very nice person."

The goose flew on without heeding him and he looked after her and
sighed. Soon after a black brant passed, and Raven cried out as
before, but the brant flew on. Again he waited and this time a duck
passed near, and when Raven cried out she turned her head a little.

"Oh, I shall succeed this time," thought Raven, and his heart beat
fast with hope. But the duck passed on, and Raven stood waiting with
bowed head.

Very soon a family of white-front geese came along, consisting of the
parents with four sons and a sister. Raven cried out, "Who wishes me
for a husband? I am a fine hunter and am young and handsome."

As he finished speaking they alighted just beyond him, and he thought,
"Surely, now I shall get a wife." He looked about and found a pretty
white stone with a hole in it lying near. He picked it up and,
stringing it on a long grass stem, hung it about his neck.

As soon as he had done this he pushed up his bill so that it slid to
the top of his head like a mask, and he became a dark-colored young
man. At the same time each of the geese pushed up its bill in the same
manner, and they became nice-looking people.

Raven walked toward them, and was much pleased with the looks of the
girl and, going to her, gave her the stone which she hung about her
neck. By doing this she showed that she accepted him for her husband.
Then they all pulled down their bills, becoming birds again, and flew
away toward the south.

The geese flapped their wings heavily and worked along slowly, while
Raven on his outspread wings glided along faster than his party, and
the geese gazed after him in admiration, exclaiming, "How light and
graceful he is!" and the little bride was very proud of her fine
husband.

But Raven was not accustomed to the long, all-day flights of the
geese, and he became tired.

"We would better stop early and look for a good place to spend the
night," he said. The others agreed to this, so they stopped and were
soon asleep.

Early the next morning the geese were astir, but Raven slept so
heavily that the father goose had to shake him and say, "Wake up! Wake
up! We must make haste for it will snow here soon; we must not
linger."

As soon as Raven was fully awake he pretended to be eager to get away,
and, as on the day before, he led all the others with his wide-spread
wings, and was greatly admired by the others, especially by his young
wife. He kept on, above or in front of his companions, and his bride
would often say, "See how gracefully he skims along without having to
flop heavy wings as we do," and she gave her brothers a side glance
which made them feel that she was contrasting their clumsiness with
his ease. After that tactless remark, the four brothers-in-law began
to feel envious of Raven.

       *       *       *       *       *

They stopped one evening on the seashore, where they feasted upon the
berries which were plentiful there, and then they settled down for the
night and fell asleep. In the morning the geese were making ready to
start without waiting for breakfast, and Raven's stomach cried out for
more of the berries. But father goose said they could not wait, and he
dared not object to starting. The brothers-in-law had secretly urged
the father not to wait, for they said, "Our sister needs to have some
of the conceit about that husband of hers taken out of her; and so
does he."

Raven dreaded the long flight across the sea, for he heard father
goose say, "We will make only one stop in crossing this water. There
is an island in the center of it, and there we will rest for a short
time and then go on to the farther shore."

Raven was ashamed to say that he feared he could never reach that
farther shore, so he determined to keep still and risk it; and off
they all flew.

The geese kept steadily on and on. After a long time Raven began to
fall behind. His wide-spread wings ached, yet the geese kept steadily
and untiringly on. His vanity was no longer gratified by admiring
remarks from his companions, for he was flapping heavily along.
Sometimes he would glide on outspread pinions for a time, hoping to
ease his tired wings, but he fell farther and farther behind.

Finally the geese looked back and the brothers said, sarcastically,
"We thought he was light and active." The father goose said, "He must
be getting tired. We must not press him too hard. We will rest."

The geese sank upon the water close together, and Raven came laboring
up and dropped upon their backs, gasping for breath. In a short time
he partially recovered and, putting one hand on his breast, said, "I
have an arrow-head here from an old war I was in, and it pains me
greatly; that is the reason I fell behind."

He had his wife put her hand on his breast to feel the arrow-head
which he declared was working its way into his heart. She could feel
nothing but his heart beating like a trip-hammer with no sign of an
arrow-point. But she said nothing, for her brothers were whispering,
"We don't believe that story about the arrow-point! How could he live
with an arrow in his heart?"

They rested two or three times more, he sinking upon their backs as
before; but when they saw the far-off shore before them father goose
said, "We can wait for you no more," for they were eager to reach the
land and find food.

They all arose and flew on, Raven slowly flapping along behind, for
his wings felt heavy. The geese kept steadily on toward the shore,
while he sank lower and lower, getting nearer to the dreaded water.
When the waves were almost touching him he shrieked to his wife:

"Leave me the white stone; it has magical powers. Throw me the white
stone."

Thus he kept crying until suddenly his wings lost their power and he
floated helplessly on the water as the geese gained the shore. He
tried to rise from the water but his wings seemed to be weighted down,
and he drifted back and forth along the beach. The waves arose and one
whitecap after another broke over him till he was soaked, and it was
only with the greatest difficulty that he could get his beak above the
surface to breathe a little between the billows.

After a long time a great wave cast him upon the land, and as it
flowed back he dug his claws into the sand to save himself from being
dragged back into the sea. As soon as he was able he struggled up the
beach, an unhappy looking object. The water ran in streams from his
soaked feathers and his wings dragged on the ground. He fell several
times, and at last, with wide-gaping mouth, he reached some bushes. As
soon as he could get his breath he took off his raven coat and pushed
up his beak, becoming a small, dark-colored man.

"From this time on, forevermore I'm done with being a goose," he
declared.





