THE GUEST


An old hag lived in a house with her grandson. She was a very bad
woman who thought of nothing but playing mischief. She was a witch and
tried to harm everybody with witchcraft.

One time a stranger came to visit some friends who lived in a house
near the old woman. The visitor was a fine hunter and went out with
his host every morning and they brought home a great deal of game. It
made the old woman envious to see her neighbor have so much to eat,
while she had little, and she determined to kill the visitor.

She made a soup of wolf's and man's brains, which was the most
poisonous food she could think of. Then she sent her grandson to
invite the stranger to eat supper at her house.

"Tell him that I desire to be polite to the guest of my neighbor, but
be sure you do not tell him what I have cooked."

The boy went to the neighboring hut and said, "Stranger, my
grandmother invites you to come to her hut and have a good feast on a
supper that she has cooked. She told me not to say that it is a wolf's
and a man's brains, and I do not say it."

The man thought a moment, and then replied, "Tell your grandam that I
will come."

He went to the hut where the old woman pretended to be very glad to
see him. They sat down at the table and while she was placing a large
dish of soup before him, he put a bowl on the floor between his feet.
He excused himself for putting his hand before his mouth because his
front teeth were gone, and every time he poured the spoonful into the
bowl.

When he had finished he said, "It is the custom in my tribe to bring
your hostess a bit of some delicious food to show that you appreciate
her hospitality. Here is a bowl of rare food which I give to you, but
it will not be good unless you eat it at once."

He gave the soup to the old witch, and the moment she tasted the broth
she herself had prepared she fell down dead.





