ORIGIN OF THE WINDS


In a village on the lower Yukon lived a man and his wife who had no
children. One day the woman said to her husband, "Far out on the
tundra there grows a solitary tree. Go to that and bring back a piece
of the trunk, and make a doll from it. Then it will seem that we have
a child."

The man went out of the house and saw a long track of bright light
like that made by the moon shining on snow, leading off across the
tundra in the direction he had been told to take. It was the Milky
Way. Along this path he traveled far away until he saw before him a
beautiful object shining in the bright light. Going up to it, he found
it was the tree of which he came in search. The tree was small, so he
took his hunting-knife, cut off a part of the trunk, and carried the
fragment home.

He sat down in the house and carved out from the wood an image of a
small boy, and his wife made two suits of clothing for it and dressed
it in one of them, "saving the other to put on when he had soiled the
first," she said.

"Now, Father, make your little boy a set of toy dishes," she said.

"I see no use in all this trouble. We will be no better off than we
were in the first place," said the man.

"Why, yes, we are already better off," said the wife. "Before we had
the doll we had nothing to talk about except ourselves. Now we have
the doll to talk about and to amuse us."

To please her the husband made the toy dishes, and she placed the doll
in the seat of honor on the bench opposite the door, with the dishes
full of food and water before it.

When the couple had gone to bed that night the room was very dark and
they heard several low, whistling sounds.

"Do you hear that? It is the doll," said the woman, shaking her
husband till he awakened.

They got up at once and, making a light, saw that the Doll had eaten
the food and drunk the water, and that its eyes were moving. The woman
caught it up with delight and fondled and played with it for a long
time. When she became tired she put it back on the bench and they went
to bed again.

In the morning when they got up the Doll was gone. They looked for it
all around the house, but could not find it. Then they went outside,
and there were its tracks leading away from the door. They followed
the tracks to the creek and along the bank to a place outside the
village, where they ended; for from this place the Doll had gone up
the Milky Way on the path of light upon which the man had gone to find
the tree.

Doll traveled along the bright path till he came to the edge of day,
where the sky comes down to the earth and walls in the light. Close
beside him, in the east, he saw a skin cover fastened over a hole in
the sky wall. The skin was bulging inward as if some strong force on
the other side were pushing it.

"It is very quiet here. I think a little wind would make it livelier,"
said the Doll, drawing his knife and cutting the cover loose on one
side of the hole. At once a strong wind blew through, every now and
then bringing with it a live reindeer. Looking through the hole, Doll
saw beyond the wall another world like the earth. He drew the cover
over the hole again.

"Do not blow too hard," he said to the wind. "Sometimes blow hard,
sometimes light, and sometimes do not blow at all."



Then he got upon the sky wall and walked along till he came to the
southeast. Here another opening was covered like the first, and the
covering was bulging inward. When he cut this covering loose a gale
swept in bringing reindeer, trees, and bushes. He quickly covered the
hole and said to the gale, "You are too strong. Sometimes blow hard,
sometimes light, and sometimes do not blow at all. The people on earth
will want variety."

Again walking along the sky wall he came to a hole in the south, and
when this covering was cut a hot wind came rushing in carrying rain
and spray from the great sea lying beyond the sky-hole on that side.
Doll closed this opening and talked to the wind as before.

Then he passed on to the west where there was another hole which
admitted heavy rainstorms, with sleet and spray from the ocean. When
he had closed this and given the wind its instructions he went on to
the northwest. There, when he cut away the covering, a cold blast came
rushing in, bringing snow and ice, so that he was chilled to the bone
and half frozen, and he made haste to close the hole as he had the
others.

He started to go along the sky wall to the north, but the cold became
more and more severe until at last he was obliged to leave the wall
and make a circuit to the southward, going back to the north only when
he came opposite the opening. There the cold was so intense that he
waited some time before he could muster courage to cut the cover away.
When he did so, a fearful blast rushed in, carrying great masses of
snow and ice, strewing it over the entire plain of the earth. It was
so bitter that he closed the hole very quickly, and told the wind from
that direction to come only in the middle of the winter so that the
people might not be taken unawares, and might be prepared for it.

From there he hastened down to warmer climes in the middle of the
earth plain, where, looking up, he saw that the sky was supported by
long, slender, arching poles, like those of a conical lodge, but made
of some beautiful material unknown to him. Journeying on, he finally
came to the village from which he started and went into his own home.

Doll lived in this village for a very long time; for when the foster
parents who had made him died, he was taken by other people of the
village and so lived on for many generations, until he finally died.
Since his death parents have made dolls for their children in
imitation of the Doll who first opened the wind-holes of the sky and
regulated all the six winds of earth.





