THE TORNIT


In olden times the Inuit were not the only tribe living in the Eskimo
country. Around Cumberland Sound there lived some very large, strong
people called the Tornit. They were on good terms with the Inuit and
shared the same hunting ground, but lived in separate villages. They
were much taller than the Inuit and had very long legs and arms, but
their eyes were not as good.

They were so strong that they could lift large boulders which were far
too heavy for the Inuit, though the latter were much stronger in those
days than they now are. Some of the stones which they used to throw
are lying about the country still, and the toughest of the men now
living cannot lift them, much less swing and throw them. Some of their
stone houses also remain. They generally lived in these houses all
winter, and did not cover them with snow to make them warmer.

The principal part of their winter dress was a long, wide coat of
deerskins, reaching to the knees and trimmed with leather straps. They
ate walrus, deer, and seal, and when they went sealing in the winter
they fastened the lower edge of their coat to the snow by means of
pegs. Under the coat they carried a small lamp, over which to melt
snow when they were thirsty, and over which to roast some of the seal
meat. They sat around a hole in the ice and watched for their prey,
and when a seal blew in the hole they whispered, "I shall stab it."
Sometimes in their eagerness they forgot the lamp and upset it as they
threw the harpoon, and thus got burned.

Their strength was so great that they could hold a harpooned walrus as
easily as the Inuit could hold a seal. These weaker men did not like
to play ball with them, for they did not realize how rough they were
and often hurt their playfellows severely. This the playfellows tried
to take in good part, and the two lived on friendly terms except for
one thing. For some reason the Tornit did not make kayaks for
themselves, although they saw how convenient they were for hunting
when the ice broke up in the spring. Every little while they would
steal a boat from the Inuit, who did not dare fight for their
property because the thieves were so much stronger.

This rankled in the hearts of the Inuit and they would talk among
themselves and threaten to take vengeance on the robbers. They debated
what they should do either to get rid of the Tornit or to make them
cease their depredations. This state of affairs had gone on till the
Inuit were at fever heat, when one day a young Tornit took the boat of
a young Inuit without asking, and in sealing with it, he ran it into
some blocks of floating ice which stove in the bottom. The owner
nursed his wrath until night, and then when the thief was asleep he
slipped into the tent and thrust his knife into the Tornit's neck.

The Tornit tribe had been aware of the growing dislike, and when at
last one of the Inuit took revenge, they feared that others might do
the same and in similar secret fashion; so they decided to leave the
country. In order to deceive their neighbors, they cut off the tails
of their long coats and tied their hair in bunches that stuck out
behind to look like a strange people as they fled.

Then they stole away, and the Inuit were so glad they were gone that
they made no effort to pursue them.





