THE WOMAN MAGICIAN


Long ago, in Aggo, a country where nobody lives nowadays, there were
two large houses standing far apart. In each of these houses many
families lived together. In the summer the people in the two houses
went in company to hunt deer and had a good time together. When fall
came they returned to their separate houses. The names of the houses
were Quern and Exaluq.

One summer it happened that the men from Quern had killed many deer,
while those from Exaluq had caught but a few. The latter said to each
other, "They are not fair; they shoot before we have a chance;" and
they became very angry.

"Let us kill them," said one.

"Yes, let us kill them, but let us wait till the end of the season,
and then we can take all the game they have in their storehouse," said
the others. For the game was packed in snow and ice and was taken home
on dog sledges when the hunting was over.

When it came time to go home both parties agreed to go on a certain
day to the storehouses and pack up the game ready to start early in
the morning. This was the time for which the men of Exaluq had been
waiting.

They started off all together with their sledges, but when they got a
long distance from the camp and very near to the storehouse, those
from Exaluq suddenly fell upon the others and slew them, for the men
from Quern had never suspected that there was any ill-feeling.

Fearing that if the dogs went back to camp without their masters, the
women and children would guess what had happened, they killed the dogs
also. When they returned, they told the women that their husbands had
separated from them and had gone off over a hill, and they did not
know what had become of them.

Now one of the young men had married a girl from Quern, and he went to
her house that night as usual, and she received him kindly, for she
believed what she had heard about the men of her party straying off.
She and all the other women thought the men would soon find their way
back, as they had hunted in these parts so long that they knew the
land.

But in the house was the girl's little brother who had seen the
husband come in; and after everybody was asleep he heard the spirits
of the murdered men calling and he recognized their voices. They told
him what had happened, and asked the boy to kill the young man in
revenge for their deaths. So he crept from under the bed and thrust a
knife into the young man's breast.

Then he awakened all the women and children in the great row of huts
and told them that the spirits of the dead men had come to him and
told of their murder, and had ordered him to avenge them by killing
the young man.

"Oh, what shall we do? What shall we do?" they cried. "They have
killed our men and they will kill us!" They were terribly frightened.

"We must fly from here before the men from Exaluq awaken and learn
that the young man is slain in revenge," said one of the old women.

"But how can we fly? Our dogs are dead, and we cannot travel fast
enough to escape."

"I will attend to that," said the old woman. In her hut was a litter
of pups, and as she was a conjurer, she said to them, "Grow up at
once." She had no fairy wand to wave over them, but she waved a stick,
and after waving it once the dogs were half-grown. She waved it
again, saying, "Be full-grown instantly;" and they were.

They harnessed the dogs at once, and in order to deceive their enemies
they left everything in the huts and even left their lights burning,
so that when the men arose in the morning they would think that they,
too, had arisen and were dressing.

When it had come full daylight next morning the men of Exaluq wondered
why the young man did not come back to them, and presently they went
to find out. They peeked into the spy-hole of the window and saw the
lamps burning, but no people inside the hut. They discovered the body
of the dead man, and then when they looked they saw the tracks of
sledges.

They wondered very much how the women could have gone away on sledges,
since they had no dogs, and they feared some other people had helped
them to get off. They hastily harnessed their own dogs and started in
pursuit of the fugitives.

The women whipped their dogs and journeyed rapidly, but the pursuers
had older and tougher animals and were likely to overtake them soon.
They became very much frightened, fearing that they would all be
killed in revenge for the death of the young man.

When the sledge of the men drew near and the women and children saw
that they could not escape, the boy who had slain the man said to the
old woman:

"The spirits of our murdered men are calling to us to cut the ice.
Cannot you cut it?"

"I think I can," she answered, and she slowly drew her first finger
across the path of the pursuers, muttering a magic charm as she did
so.

The ice gave a terrific crack, and the water came gushing through the
crevasse. They sped on, and presently she drew another line with her
finger, and another crack opened and the ice between the two cracks
broke up and the floe began to move.

The men, dashing ahead with all speed, could scarcely stop their dog
team in time to escape falling into the open water. The floe was so
wide and so long that it was impossible for them to cross, and thus
the women and children were saved by the art of their conjurer.



