THE ALPINE HORSE-PHANTOM


On the high Alp, called Els, in the Hinderdux, resides a mountain
spirit, which the inhabitants of the surrounding country are unable
to paint horribly enough. It is described as a terrible horse-phantom,
which nobody dare approach, and which snorts fever and death
wheresoever it goes. Many mountaineers and gazelle-hunters have met
with their death by this spirit, and only he is safe who has gun,
sword, and dogs with him.

One day a courageous Alpine hunter resolved to go and fight the
mountain ghost, so he loaded his rifle with a crossed bullet, and
climbed up the mountain. Not far from the hut, which stands on the Els
Alp, is a cross, at which he knelt and repeated a prayer, and he had
scarcely left the spot, when a little grey mountain dwarf drew near to
him, and begged for a little bread and brandy. The huntsman shared with
the dwarf his bread and smoked-gazelle meat; after which the little
grey man told him to go back, and bring his gun, sword, and dogs, or
else he would be powerless against the mountain ghost, who otherwise
would smash him into pieces. The gazelle-hunter followed this advice,
and soon returned to execute his courageous purpose.

But it happened far otherwise than he had expected. The mountain
ghost, in the form of a horrible horse, appeared, and galloped upon him
with tremendous fury, snorting fire and sulphurous smoke, stamping, and
roaring, and neighing so loud, that the very mountain shook with the
sound; then he shouted to the huntsman with a voice of thunder, "You
rascal, if you had not gun, sword, and dogs with you, I should smash
you to pieces."

At this reception, the huntsman stood like one petrified; his teeth
chattered, and all desire to fight with a ghost passed away for ever
from his mind. The horse-phantom then turned his heels and galloped
back again to the Gletscherwand, from whence he had come.




