THE PETRIFIED LOVERS OF KRAMSACH


Near Kramsach, in the Under-Inn valley, on the spot where the
Brandenberg Achenthal commences, lie on the Middle Mountain some small
lakes, and above the farms called Moesern and Freundsheim, about three
miles above Kramsach, stands another beautiful lake, close beneath the
Mooswand mountain, and above the lake is still to be seen the ruin of
an old stronghold, called the Gruckenbuehl. The daughter of the last
Baron who resided there was passionately fond of a poor forester, and
when the proud and cruel Baron came to hear of the secret rendezvous
between his daughter and the huntsman, he ordered him, one pitch-dark
night, to be chased out of the castle by the hounds, and, in the hurry
of the flight, the poor fellow fell over a rock into the See, and was
drowned.

After this act of cruelty and injustice, the poor girl wandered about
silent and abstracted, and would neither enter into any amusement,
nor take part in any ordinary pursuit of life. One day she went with
her maid down to the lake, and, as she looked into its gloomy depths,
she saw the dead body of her lover, and, in the frenzy of grief, she
threw herself down into the water. The maid ran home recounting this
misfortune, and when the wicked Baron, with all his retinue, arrived on
the borders of the lake, neither the body of his poor daughter nor that
of the forester were to be found. The two lovers had been changed into
rocks, both of which rise out of the lake, like little islands; the one
overgrown with ferns and water weeds, and the other bare as a polished
piece of granite.




