THE WHITE SNAKE


Close to Mitterwald, on the little river Eisach, rises on the
right-hand side of the village the enormous mountain called the
Mitterwalder Alp, upon which, on account of the great number of
venomous snakes which were there, no cattle could be pastured. The
majority of these were huge white reptiles, of which the people were
particularly fearful. About fifty years ago there arrived in the
country one of those students, or as they called them, "Fahrende
Schueler" (wandering collegians), to whom people used to attribute
supernatural power, and the peasants asked him to rid them of the
plague of snakes.

The student promptly assented to their request, and went up the
mountain, where he made a circle upon the Alp-meadow, and ordered the
peasants to plant a tree in the middle of the ring; then he climbed
the tree, and by his incantations he charmed all the snakes into the
large fire which he had lighted around it. But all at once a huge snake
hissed loudly and fiercely, and on hearing this the student cried out,
"I am lost;" and at the same moment a white snake darted with the
swiftness of an arrow through his body, and he fell dead from the tree,
and was consumed in the fire.

Those who recounted this tale added, "It was a hazel-worm, for only
those snakes have the power to dart through the air like an arrow and
pierce through people's bodies." On the spot where this accident took
place, and where the student made the fiery circle, there has never
since an atom of grass grown again.

It is asserted the blindworms had once the same power, until it was
taken away from them by the Blessed Virgin, who has caused them ever
afterwards to remain sightless.




