THE TWO HAYSTACKS


One of the most beautiful and noted Alps in the Tyrol is the
Seisser-Alp, in the Eisack valley, not far from which stands the
Schlern, 8100 feet high, with its two pyramids of dolomite rock. About
four miles from the Schlern, and joining the wonderful Rosen Garten of
King Laurin, are the Rothe Wand and the Rothe Wies, out of which rise
two enormous peaks.

Upon the Schlern pilgrims resort to the Holy Cassian, and on the day of
this Saint, the fifth of August, there takes place every year a great
fete in the chapel, which stands on the spot. From the parish of
Voels, which lies about nine miles lower down, the inhabitants wend on
that day up the mountain to the chapel, and all the mountaineers from
the Seisser-Alp assemble there in their Sunday's best to fete the
Saint.

One day it came into the mind of a farmer to make hay on St. Cassian's
day. His servant reluctantly obeyed his commands, and his neighbours
kind-heartedly warned him that it was a crime to make hay on the day
of the Saint who was so universally revered. But the farmer laughed
mockingly, and said, "Be it Cassian's day or not, the hay must up upon
the stacks;" and so he worked on the faster with his servants. At
last all the hay, after having been raked together, was pitched up in
two large heaps, which are called there, "Schober," and as the last
forkful was thrown upon the top, the two "Heuschober" (haystacks) were
turned into stone, and in this shape they still stand on the same
spot as an everlasting warning. Since that time no one has ever again
thought of working on St. Cassian's day.




