KINKACH MARTINKO




Once upon a time there was a poor woman who had an only daughter,
named Helen, a very lazy girl. One day when she had refused to do a
single thing, her mother took her down to the banks of a stream and
began to strike her fingers with a flat stone, just as you do in
beating linen to wash it.

The girl cried a good deal. A prince, Lord of the Red Castle, happened
at that moment to pass by, and inquired as to the cause of such
treatment, for it horrified him that a mother should so ill-use her
child.

"Why should I not punish her?" answered the woman. "The idle girl can
do nothing but spin hemp into gold thread."

"Really?" cried he. "Does she really know how to spin gold thread out
of hemp? If that be so, sell her to me."

"Willingly; how much will you give me for her?"

"Half a measure of gold."

"Take her," said the mother; and she gave him her daughter as soon as
the money was paid.

The prince placed the girl behind him on the saddle, put spurs to his
horse, and took her home.

On reaching the Red Castle, the prince led Helen into a room filled
from floor to ceiling with hemp, and having supplied her with distaff
and spinning-wheel, said, "When you have spun all this hemp into gold
thread I will make you my wife."

Then he went out, locking the door after him.

On finding herself a prisoner, the poor girl wept as if her heart
would break. Suddenly she saw a very odd-looking little man seated on
the window-sill. He wore a red cap, and his boots were made of some
strange sort of material.

"Why do you weep so?" he asked.

"I cannot help it," she replied, "I am but a miserable slave. I have
been ordered to spin all this hemp into gold thread, but it is
impossible, I can never do it, and I know not what will become of me."

"I will do it for you in three days, on condition that at the end of
that time you guess my right name, and tell me what the boots I am
wearing now are made of."

Without for one moment reflecting as to whether she would be able to
guess aright she consented. The uncanny little man burst out laughing,
and taking her distaff set to work at once.

All day as the distaff moved the hemp grew visibly less, while the
skein of gold thread became larger and larger.

The little man spun all the time, and, without stopping an instant,
explained to Helen how to make thread of pure gold. As night drew on
he tied up the skein, saying to the girl, "Well, do you know my name
yet? Can you tell me what my boots are made of?"

Helen replied that she could not, upon which he grinned and
disappeared through the window. She then sat and looked at the sky,
and thought, and thought, and thought, and lost herself in
conjecturing as to what the little man's name might be, and in trying
to guess what was the stuff his boots were made of. Were they of
leather? or perhaps plaited rushes? or straw? or cast iron? No, they
did not look like anything of that sort. And as to his name--that was
a still more difficult problem to solve.

"What shall I call him?" said she to herself--"John? Or Henry? Who
knows? perhaps it is Paul or Joseph."

These thoughts so filled her mind that she forgot to eat her dinner.
Her meditations were interrupted by cries and groans from outside,
where she saw an old man with white hair sitting under the castle
wall.

"Miserable old man that I am," cried he; "I die of hunger and thirst,
but no one pities my sufferings."

Helen hastened to give him her dinner, and told him to come next day,
which he promised to do.

After again thinking for some time what answers she should give the
little old man, she fell asleep on the hemp.

The little old man did not fail to make his appearance the first thing
next morning, and remained all day spinning the gold thread. The work
progressed before their eyes, and it was only when evening came that
he repeated his questions. Not receiving a satisfactory answer, he
vanished in a fit of mocking laughter. Helen sat down by the window to
think; but think as she might, no answer to these puzzling questions
occurred to her.

While thus wondering the hungry old man again came by, and she gave
him her dinner. She was heart-sick and her eyes were full of tears,
for she thought she would never guess the spinner's name, nor of what
stuff his boots were made, unless perhaps God would help her.

"Why are you so sad?" asked the old man when he had eaten and drunk;
"tell me the cause of your grief, dear lady."

For a long time she would not tell him, thinking it would be useless;
but at last, yielding to his entreaties, she gave a full account of
the conditions under which the gold thread was made, explaining that
unless she could answer the little old man's questions satisfactorily
she feared some great misfortune would befall her. The old man
listened attentively, then, nodding his head, he said:

"In coming through the forest to-day I passed close to a large pile of
burning wood, round which were placed nine iron pots. A little man in
a red cap was running round and jumping over them, singing these
words:

  "My sweet friend, fair Helen, at the Red Castle near,
    Two days and two nights seeks my name to divine.
  She'll never find out, so the third night 'tis clear
    My sweet friend, fair Helen, can't fail to be mine.
  Hurrah! for my name is KINKACH MARTINKO,
  Hurrah! for my boots are of doggies' skin O!"

"Now that is exactly what you want to know, my dear girl; so do not
forget, and you are saved."

And with these words the old man vanished.

Helen was greatly astonished, but she took care to fix in her memory
all that the good fellow had told her, and then went to sleep, feeling
that she could face to-morrow without fear.

On the third day, very early in the morning, the little old man
appeared and set busily to work, for he knew that all the hemp must be
spun before sunset, and that then he should be able to claim his
rights. When evening came all the hemp was gone, and the room shone
with the brightness of the golden thread.

As soon as his work was done, the queer little old man with the red
cap drew himself up with a great deal of assurance, and with his hands
in his pockets strutted up and down before Helen, ordering her to tell
him his right name and to say of what stuff the boots were made: but
he felt certain that she would not be able to answer aright.

"Your name is KINKACH MARTINKO, and your boots are made of dogskin,"
she replied without the slightest hesitation.

At these words he spun round on the floor like a bobbin, tore out his
hair and beat his breast with rage, roaring so that the very walls
trembled.

"It is lucky for you that you have guessed. If you had not, I should
have torn you to pieces on this very spot:" so saying he rushed out of
the window like a whirlwind.

Helen felt deeply grateful towards the old man who had told her the
answers, and hoped to be able to thank him in person. But he never
appeared again.

The Prince of the Red Castle was very pleased with her for having
accomplished her task so punctually and perfectly, and he married her
as he had promised.

Helen was truly thankful to have escaped the dangers that had
threatened her, and her happiness as a princess was greater than she
had dared hope. She had, too, such a good stock of gold thread that
she never had occasion to spin any more all her life long.



THE STORY OF THE PLENTIFUL TABLECLOTH, THE AVENGING WAND, THE SASH
THAT BECOMES A LAKE, AND THE TERRIBLE HELMET


Now it once happened that one of the king's herdsmen had three sons.
Two of these lads were supposed to be very sharp-witted, while the
youngest was thought to be very stupid indeed. The elder sons helped
their father to look after the flocks and herds, while the fool, so
they called him, was good for nothing but sleeping and amusing
himself.

He would pass whole days and nights slumbering peacefully on the
stove, only getting off when forced to by others, or when he was too
warm and wished to lie on the other side, or when, hungry and thirsty,
he wanted food and drink.

His father had no love for him, and called him a ne'er-do-well. His
brothers often tormented him by dragging him off the stove, and taking
away his food--indeed, he would many a time have gone hungry if his
mother had not been good to him and fed him on the quiet. She caressed
him fondly, for why should he suffer, thought she, if he does happen
to have been born a fool? Besides, who can understand the ways of God?
It sometimes happens that the wisest men are not happy, while the
foolish, when harmless and gentle, lead contented lives.

One day, on their return from the fields, the fool's two brothers
dragged him off the stove, and taking him into the yard, where they
gave him a sound thrashing, they turned him out of the house, saying,
"Go, fool, and lose no time, for you shall have neither food nor
lodging until you bring us a basket of mushrooms from the wood."

The poor lad was so taken by surprise he hardly understood what his
brothers wanted him to do. After pondering for a while he made his way
towards a small oak forest, where everything seemed to have a strange
and marvellous appearance, so strange that he did not recognise the
place. As he walked he came to a small dead tree-stump, on the top of
which he placed his cap, saying, "Every tree here raises its head to
the skies and wears a good cap of leaves, but you, my poor friend, are
bare-headed; you will die of cold. You must be among your brothers, as
I am among mine--a born fool. Take then my cap." And, throwing his
arms round the dead stump, he wept and embraced it tenderly. At that
moment an oak which stood near began to walk towards him as if it were
alive. The poor fellow was frightened, and about to run away, but the
oak spake like a human being and said, "Do not fly; stop a moment and
listen to me. This withered tree is my son, and up to this time no one
has grieved for his dead youth but me. You have now watered him with
your tears, and in return for your sympathy you shall henceforward
have anything you ask of me, on pronouncing these words:

  "'O Oak Tree so green, and with acorns of gold,
    Your friendship to prove I will try;
  In Heaven's good name now to beg I'll make bold,
    My needs, then, oh kindly supply.'"

At the same moment a shower of golden acorns fell. The fool filled his
pockets, thanked the oak, and bowing to her returned home.

"Well, stupid, where are the mushrooms?" cried one of his brothers.

"I have some mushrooms off the oak in my pockets."

"Eat them yourself then, for you will get nothing else, you
good-for-nothing. What have you done with your cap?"

"I put it on a poor stump of a tree that stood by the wayside, for its
head was uncovered, and I was afraid it might freeze."

He then scrambled on to the top of the stove, and as he lay down some
of the golden acorns fell out of his pocket. So bright were they, they
shone like sunbeams in the room. In spite of the fool's entreaties the
brothers picked them up and gave them to their father, who hastened to
present them to the king, telling him that his idiot son had gathered
them in the wood. The king immediately sent a detachment of his guards
to the forest to find the oak which bore golden acorns. But their
efforts were fruitless, for, though they hunted in every nook and
corner of the forest, they found not a single oak that bore acorns of
gold.

At first the king was very angry, but when he grew calmer he sent for
his herdsman and said to him, "Tell your son, the fool, that he must
bring me, by this evening, a cask filled to the brim with these
precious golden acorns. If he obeys my commands you shall never lack
bread and salt, and you may rest assured that my royal favour will not
fail you in time of need."

The herdsman gave his youngest son the king's message.

"The king, I see," he replied, "is fond of a good bargain; he does not
ask, he commands--and insists upon a fool fetching him acorns of solid
gold in return for promises made of air. No, I shall not go."

And neither prayers nor threats were of the slightest avail to make
him change his mind. At last his brothers pulled him forcibly off the
stove, put his coat on him and a new cap, and dragged him into the
yard, where they gave him a good beating and drove him away, saying,
"Now, you stupid, lose no time; be off, and be quick. If you return
without the golden acorns you shall have neither supper nor bed."

What was the poor fellow to do? For a long time he wept, then crossing
himself he went in the direction of the forest. He soon reached the
dead stump, upon which his cap still rested, and going up to the
mother oak, said to her:

  "O Oak Tree so green, and with acorns of gold,
    In my helplessness I to thee cry;
  In Heaven's great name now to beg I make bold,
    My pressing needs pray satisfy."

The oak moved, and shook its branches: but instead of golden acorns, a
tablecloth fell into the fool's hands. And the tree said, "Keep this
cloth always in your possession, and for your own use. When you want a
benefit by it, you need only say:

  "'O Tablecloth, who for the poor,
    The hungry, and thirsty, makes cheer,
  May he who begs from door to door
    Feed off you without stint or fear.'"

When it had uttered these words the oak ceased to speak, and the fool,
thanking her, bowed, and turned towards home. On his way he wondered
to himself how he should tell his brothers, and what they would say,
but above all he thought how his good mother would rejoice to see the
feast-giving tablecloth. When he had walked about half the distance he
met an old beggar who said to him, "See what a sick and ragged old man
I am: for the love of God give me a little money or some bread."

The fool spread his tablecloth on the grass, and inviting the beggar
to sit down, said:

  "O Tablecloth, who for the poor,
    The hungry, and thirsty, makes cheer,
  May he who begs from door to door
    Feed off you without stint or fear."

Then a whistling was heard in the air, and overhead something shone
brightly. At the same instant a table, spread as for a royal banquet,
appeared before them. Upon it were many different kinds of food,
flasks of mead, and glasses of the choicest wine. The plate was of
gold and silver.

The fool and the beggar man crossed themselves and began to feast.
When they had finished the whistling was again heard, and everything
vanished. The fool folded up his tablecloth and went on his way. But
the old man said, "If you will give me your tablecloth you shall have
this wand in exchange. When you say certain words to it, it will set
upon the person or persons pointed out, and give them such a
thrashing, that to get rid of it they will give you anything they
possess."

The fool thought of his brothers and exchanged the tablecloth for the
wand, after which they both went on their respective ways.

Suddenly the fool remembered that the oak had ordered him to keep the
tablecloth for his own use, and that by parting with it he had lost
the power of giving his mother an agreeable surprise. So he said to
the wand:

  "Thou self-propelling, ever willing, fighting Wand,
      Run quick and bring
  My feast-providing tablecloth back to my hand,
      Thy praise I'll sing."

The wand went off like an arrow after the old man, quickly overtook
him, and throwing itself upon him began to beat him dreadfully, crying
out in a loud voice:

  "For others' goods you seem to have a liking,
  Stop, thief, or sure your back I'll keep on striking."

The poor beggar tried to run away, but it was of no use, for the wand
followed him, striking all the time and repeating the same words over
and over again. So in spite of his anxiety to keep the tablecloth he
was forced to throw it away and flee.

The wand brought the cloth back to the fool, who again went on his way
towards home, thinking of the surprise in store for his mother and
brothers. He had not gone very far when a traveller, carrying an empty
wallet, accosted him, saying, "For the love of God, give me a small
coin or a morsel of food, for my bag is empty and I am very hungry. I
have, too, a long journey before me."

The fool again spread his tablecloth on the grass and said:

  "O Tablecloth, who for the poor,
    The hungry, and thirsty, makes cheer,
  May he who begs from door to door
    Feed off you without stint or fear."

A whistling was heard in the air, something shone brightly overhead,
and a table, spread as for a royal feast, placed itself before them.
It was laid with a numerous variety of dishes, hydromel and costly
wines. The fool and his guest sat down, crossed themselves, and ate to
their hearts' content. When they had finished whistling was again
heard, and everything vanished. The fool folded the cloth up
carefully, and was about to continue his journey when the traveller
said, "Will you exchange your tablecloth for my waistband? When you
say to it certain words it will turn into a deep lake, upon which you
may float at will. The words run thus:

  "'O marvellous, wonderful, lake-forming Band,
    For my safety, and not for my fun,
  Bear me in a boat on thy waves far from land,
    So that I from my foes need not run.'"

The fool thought his father would find it very convenient always to
have water at hand for the king's flocks, so he gave his tablecloth in
exchange for the belt, which he wound round his loins, and taking the
wand in his hand, they went off in opposite directions. After a little
while the fool began to reflect on what the oak had told him about
keeping the tablecloth for his own use, and he remembered, too, that
he was depriving himself of the power of giving his mother a pleasant
surprise. Thereupon he said the magic words to his wand:

  "Thou self-propelling, ever willing, fighting Wand,
      Run quick and bring
  My feast-providing tablecloth back to my hand,
      Thy praise I'll sing."

The wand at once started in pursuit of the poor traveller, whom it
began to beat, at the same time crying out:

  "For others' goods you seem to have a liking,
  Stop, thief, or sure your back I'll keep on striking."

The man was scared out of his wits, and tried to escape the wand's
blows, but it was of no use, so he was forced to throw the tablecloth
away and run at the top of his speed. The wand brought the tablecloth
back to his master. The latter hid it under his coat, rearranged the
waistband, and taking the faithful wand in his hand, again went
towards home. As he walked he rejoiced to think of the pleasure he
should have in exercising the wand on his wicked brothers, of his
father's satisfaction when, by the help of the waistband, he could
always have water for the king's flocks, even in the driest weather,
and of his mother's joy on witnessing the wonders of the feast-giving
tablecloth. These pleasant thoughts were interrupted by a soldier,
lame, clothed in rags, and covered with wounds. He had once been a
famous warrior.

"I am pursued by misfortunes," said he to the fool. "I was once a
brave soldier, and fought valiantly in my youth. Now I am lamed for
life, and on this lonely road have found no one to give me a morsel of
food. Have pity on me and give me a little bread."

The fool sat down on the grass, and spreading out his tablecloth,
said:

  "O Tablecloth, who for the poor,
    The hungry, and thirsty, makes cheer,
  May he who begs from door to door
    Feed off you without stint or fear."

A whistling was heard in the air, something bright shone overhead, and
then before them stood a table, spread as for a royal feast, loaded
with dainty dishes, mead, and costly wines. When they had eaten and
drunk as much as they wanted the whistling was again heard, and then
everything vanished.

The fool was folding up his tablecloth, when the soldier said:

"Will you give me your tablecloth in exchange for this six-horned
helmet? It will fire itself off and instantly destroy the object
pointed out. You have but to turn it round on your head and repeat
these words:

  "'O Magic Helmet, never thou
    Dost want for powder nor shot;
  Allay my fears and fire now
    Just where I point. Fail not.'

You will see that it fires off immediately: and even if your enemy
were a mile away he would fall."

The fool was delighted with the idea, and thought how useful such a
hat would be in any sudden danger; it would even serve him to defend
his country, the king, or himself. So he handed the tablecloth to the
soldier, put the helmet on his head, took his wand in his hand, and
again set his face towards home.

When he had gone some distance, and the soldier was almost out of
sight, he began to think of what the oak had said about not parting
with the tablecloth, and of how his dear mother could not now enjoy
the pleasant surprise he had been dreaming about. So he said to the
wand:

  "Thou self-propelling, ever willing, fighting Wand,
      Run quick, and bring
  My feast-providing tablecloth back to my hand,
      Thy praise I'll sing."

The wand dashed after the soldier, and having reached him began to
beat him, crying out:

  "For others' goods you seem to have a liking,
  Stop, thief, or sure your back I'll keep on striking."


The soldier was still a powerful man, and in spite of his wound turned
right about face, intending to give blow for blow. But the wand was
too much for him, and he soon found resistance useless. So, overcome
by pain rather than fear, he threw away the tablecloth and took to his
heels.

The faithful wand brought the tablecloth back to his master, who, glad
to have it again, once more turned towards home.

He soon left the forest, crossed the fields, and came in sight of his
father's house. At a little distance therefrom his brothers met him,
and said crossly, "Well, stupid, where are the golden acorns?"

The fool looked at them and laughed in their faces. Then he said to
his wand:

  "O self-propelling, ever willing, fighting Wand
      Strike with thy usual fire
  My ever-scolding, teasing, worrying brother band,
      For they have roused my ire."

The wand needed no second bidding, and darting out of his hand began
to thrash the brothers soundly, crying out like a reasoning creature:

  "Your brother has often your blows felt, alack!
  Now taste it yourselves; hope you like it, whack, whack."

The brothers were overpowered, and felt all the while as if boiling
water were being poured over their heads. Yelling with pain they began
to run at full speed, and soon disappeared with clouds of dust flying
round them.

The wand then came back to the fool's hand. He went into the house,
climbed on the stove, and told his mother all that had happened. Then
he cried:

  "O Tablecloth, who for the poor,
    The hungry, and thirsty, makes cheer,
  Let us within our cottage door
    Feed off you without stint or fear."

A whistling was heard in the air, something bright shone overhead, and
then a table, laid as for a royal banquet, was placed before them,
covered with dainty meats, glasses, and bottles of mead and wine. The
whole service was of gold and silver. As the fool and his mother were
about to begin the feast the herdsman entered. He stopped, dumb with
amazement, but when invited to partake, began to eat and drink with
great enjoyment.

At the end of the meal the whistling was again heard, and everything
vanished completely.

The herdsman set off in hot haste to the court, to tell the king of
this new marvel. Thereupon his majesty sent one of his heroes in
search of the fool, whom he found stretched on the stove.

"If you value your life, listen, and obey the king's orders," said the
paladin. "He commands you to send him by me your tablecloth, then you
shall have your share of his royal favour. But if not you will always
remain a poor fool, and will, moreover, be treated as a refractory
prisoner. We teach them how to behave; you understand?"

"Oh yes, I understand." And then he pronounced the magic words:

  "O self-propelling, ever willing, fighting Wand,
      Go, soundly thrash that man--
  The most deceiving, dangerous wretch in all the land,
      So hurt him all you can."

The wand sprang from the fool's hand with the speed of lightning and
struck the paladin three times in the face. He immediately fled, but
the wand was after him, hitting him all the time, and crying out:

  "Mere promises are children's play,
  So do not throw your breath away,
  But think of something true to say,
  You rogue, when next you come our way."

Defeated and filled with consternation, the paladin returned to the
king and told him about the wand, and how badly he had been beaten.
When the king heard that the fool possessed a wand that struck of
itself, he wanted it so much that for a time he forgot all about the
tablecloth, and sent some of his soldiers with orders to bring him
back the wand.

When they entered the cottage, the fool, as usual, was lying on the
stove.

"Deliver up the wand to us instantly," said they; "the king is willing
to pay any price you ask, but if you refuse he will take it from you
by force."

Instead of replying the fool unwound the waistband, saying to it as he
did so:

  "O marvellous, wonderful, lake-forming Band,
    For my safety, and not for my fun,
  Bear me in a boat on thy waves far from land,
    So that I from my foes need not run."

There was a shimmering in the air, while at the same moment everything
around them disappeared, and a beautiful lake, long, wide, and deep,
was seen, surrounded by green fields. Fish with golden scales and eyes
of pearls played in the clear water. In the centre, in a small silver
skiff, rowed a man, whom the soldiers recognised as the fool.

They remained some time looking at this miracle, and then ran off to
tell the king. Now when the king heard thereof he was so anxious to
possess the lake, or rather the waistband that produced the lake, that
he sent a whole battalion of soldiers to take the fool prisoner.

This time they managed to get hold of him while he was asleep, but as
they were about to tie his hands he turned his hat round and said:

  "O Magic Helmet, never thou
    Dost want for powder nor shot,
  Allay my fears and fire now
    Just where I point. Fail not."

Instantly a hundred bullets whistled through the air, amid clouds of
smoke and loud reports. Many of the soldiers fell dead, others took
refuge in the wood, whence they returned to the king to give an
account of what had taken place.

Whereupon the king flew into a violent rage, furious that he had as
yet failed to take the fool. But his wish to possess the feast-giving
tablecloth, the magic wand, the lake-forming sash, and above all the
helmet with twenty-four horns, was stronger than ever.

Having reflected for some days on the best ways and means to attain
his object, he resolved to try the effect of kindness, and sent for
the fool's mother.

"Tell your son, the fool," said his majesty to the woman, "that my
charming daughter and I send greeting, and that we shall consider it
an honour if he will come here and show us the marvellous things he
possesses. Should he feel inclined to make me a present of them, I
will give him half my kingdom and will make him my heir. You may also
say that the princess, my daughter, will choose him for her husband."

The good woman hastened home to her son, whom she advised to accept
the king's invitation and show him his treasures. The fool wound the
waistband round his loins, put the helmet on his head, hid the
tablecloth in his breast, took his magic wand in his hand, and started
off to go to the court.

The king was not there on his arrival, but he was received by the
paladin, who saluted him courteously. Music played, and the troops did
him military honours--in fact, he was treated far better than he had
expected. On being presented to the king he took off his helmet, and
bowing low, said: "O king, I am come to lay at the foot of your throne
my tablecloth, waistband, wand, and helmet. In return for these gifts
I beg that your favour may be shown to the most humble of your
subjects."

"Tell me then, fool, what price you want for these goods?"

"Not money, sire, a fool of my sort cares very little about money. Has
not the king promised my mother that he will give me in exchange the
half of his kingdom, and the hand of his daughter in marriage? These
are the gifts I claim."

After these words the paladin was filled with envy at the good fortune
of the fool, and made a sign for the guards to enter. The soldiers
seized the poor fellow, dragged him out into the courtyard, and they
killed him treacherously to the sound of drums and trumpets, after
which they covered him over with earth.

Now it happened that when the soldiers stabbed him his blood spurted
out, and some of the drops fell beneath the princess's window. The
maiden wept bitterly at the sight, watering the blood-stained ground
with her tears. And lo! marvellous to relate, an apple-tree grew out
of the blood-sprinkled earth. And it grew so rapidly that its branches
soon touched the windows of her rooms; by noon it was covered with
blossom, while at eventide ripe red apples hung thereon. As the
princess was admiring them she noticed that one of the apples
trembled, and when she touched it, it fell into the bosom of her
dress. This took her fancy, and she held it in her hand.

Meanwhile the sun had set, night had fallen, and every one in the
palace was asleep, except the guard, the paladin, and the princess.
The guard, sword in hand, patrolled up and down, for it was his duty.
The princess toyed with her pretty little apple, and could not sleep.
The paladin, who had gone to bed, was aroused by a sound that made his
blood run cold, for the avenging wand stood before him and began to
beat him soundly. And although he rushed from the room trying to
escape from it, it followed him, crying out:

  "False paladin, you worthless man,
    Do not so envious be;
  Why act unjustly, when you can
    Both just and honest be?
  For others' goods why have you such a liking?
  You rogue, you thief, be sure I'll keep on striking."

The unhappy man wept and cried for mercy, but the wand still continued
to strike.

The princess was distressed on hearing these cries of distress, and
she watered her much-cherished apple with her tears. And, strange to
tell, the apple grew and changed its shape. Thus continuing to change,
it suddenly turned into a handsome young man, even the very same who
had been killed that morning.

"Lovely princess, I salute you," said the fool. "The cunning of the
paladin caused my death, but with your tears you have restored me to
life. Your father promised to give you to me: are you willing?"

"If such be the king's wish, I consent," replied she, as she gave him
her hand with a tender look.

As he spoke the door opened, admitting the helmet, which placed itself
upon his head; the sash, which wound itself round his waist; the
tablecloth, which hid itself in one of his pockets; and the avenging
wand, which placed itself in his hand. Then came the king, all out of
breath, and wondering what the noise was about. He was amazed to see
the fool alive again, and even more so that he should be with the
princess.

The young fellow, fearing the king's wrath, cried out:

  "O marvellous, wonderful, lake-forming Band,
    For my safety, and not for my fun,
  Bear us in a boat on thy waves far from land,
    So that we from our foes need not run."

There was a shimmering in the air, and then everything disappeared,
while on the lawn before the palace stretched a wide deep lake, in the
crystal water of which swam little fish with eyes of pearl and scales
of gold. Far away rowed the princess and the fool in a silver skiff.
The king stood on the shores of the lake and signed to them to return.
When they had landed they knelt at his feet and avowed their mutual
love. Upon which his majesty bestowed his blessing, the lake
disappeared, and they again found themselves in the princess's
apartments.

The king called a special meeting of his council, at which he
explained how things had turned out--that he had made the fool his
heir, and betrothed him to his daughter, and had put the paladin in
prison.

The fool gave the king his magic treasures, and told him what words to
say in each case.

Next day all their wishes were fulfilled. The fool of the family was
married to the princess, and at the same time received half the
kingdom, with the promise of succession to the throne. And the wedding
feast, to which all the rich and noble of the land were invited,
exceeded in its magnificence and splendour any other festival ever
seen or heard of.
