CHUNKS OF DAYLIGHT


At the northern part of the continent, in the land of the midnight
sun, where in the long summer days the sun at midnight is just
slipping below the northern horizon and immediately is seen coming up
again, and where in the long nights of winter there is scarcely any
daytime at all, it is not strange that the legends of the people often
treat of daylight and especially of darkness. The long nights become
oppressive, and the people have different theories as to the cause of
it, which they weave into legends such as the following.

In the days when the earth was a child, there was light from the sun
and moon as there is now. Then the sun and moon were taken away and
the people were left for a long time with no light but the shining of
the stars. The shamans, or priests, made their strongest charms to no
purpose, for the darkness of night continued.

In a village of the lower Yukon there lived an orphan boy who always
sat upon the bench with the humble people, over the entrance way of
the kashim or assembly house. The other people thought he was foolish,
and he was despised and ill-treated by everyone. After the shamans had
tried very hard to bring back the sun and moon and had failed, the boy
began to ridicule them.

"What fine shamans you must be, not to be able to bring back the
light, when even I can do it," he said mockingly.

At this the shamans became very angry and beat him and drove him out
of the kashim. The orphan was like any other boy until he put on a
black coat which he had, when he became a raven and remained in that
form until he removed his coat. When the shamans drove him out, he
went to the house of his aunt in the village and told her what he had
said, and how the shamans had beaten him and driven him out of the
kashim.

"Tell me where the sun and moon have gone, for I am going after them,"
said he.

"They are hidden somewhere, but I don't know where it is," she
replied.

"I am sure you know where they are, for look what a neatly sewed coat
you wear, and you could not see to do that if you did not know where
the light is."

After a great deal of persuasion the aunt said: "Well, if you wish to
find the light you must take your snowshoes and go far, far to the
southland, to the place you will know when you get there."

The boy put on his black coat, took his snowshoes, and at once set off
for the south. For many days he traveled, while the darkness always
remained the same. When he had gone a very long way, he saw far ahead
of him a single ray of light, and that cheered and encouraged him.

As he hurried on, the light showed again plainer than before and then
vanished; and kept appearing and vanishing at intervals. At last he
came to a large hill, one side of which was in a bright light while
the other was in the blackness of night. Ahead of him and close to the
hill he saw a hut with a man who was shoveling snow from the front of
it.

The man was tossing the snow high in air, and each time he did this
the light was hidden, thus causing the changes from light to darkness
which the boy had noticed as he approached. Close beside the house he
saw a great blazing ball of fire--the light he had come to find.

The boy stopped and began to plan how he could secure the light and
the shovel from the man. After a time he walked up to the man and
asked, "Why are you throwing up the snow and hiding the light from
our village?"



The man stopped his work, looked up and said, "I am only clearing away
the snow from my door. I am not hiding the light. But who are you, and
where do you come from?"

"It is so dark at our village that I did not like to live there, so I
came here to live with you," said the boy.

"What? Will you stay all the time?" asked the man in surprise.

"Yes," replied the boy.

"That is well; come into the house with me," said the man.

He dropped his shovel on the ground and, stooping down, led the way
into the underground passage to the house, letting the curtain fall in
front of the door as he passed, for he thought the boy was close
behind him.

The moment the door flap fell behind the man as he entered, the boy
caught up the ball of light and put it in the turned-up flap of his
fur coat in front. Catching up the shovel in one hand, he ran away to
the north, running until his feet became tired. Then he whipped on his
magic coat and became a raven and flew as fast as his wings would
carry him. Behind he heard the frightful shrieks and cries of the old
man, following fast in pursuit.

When the old man found that he could not overtake the raven he cried
to him, "Never mind; you may keep the light, but give me my shovel."

"No; you made our village dark and you cannot have the shovel," called
the raven, and flew faster, leaving the man far in the rear.

As the raven boy traveled home, he tore out a chunk from the light
ball and threw it away, thus making a day. Then he went on for a long
way in the darkness, and threw out another piece of light, making it
day again. He continued to do this at intervals until he reached the
kashim in his own village, where he dropped the rest of the ball.

Then he went into the kashim and said, "Now, you worthless shamans,
you see I have brought back the light, and hereafter it will be light
and then dark, making day and night."

And the shamans could not answer.





