THE DWARF PEOPLE


Very long ago, before the white people ever went into the land of the
Eskimo, there was a large village at Pik-mik-tal-ik. One winter day
the people living there were surprised to see a small man and a small
woman with a child coming down the river on the ice. The man was so
little that he wore a coat made of a single white fox skin. The
woman's coat was made from the skins of two white hares; while two
muskrat skins clothed the child.

The father and mother were about two cubits high, and the boy not over
the length of one's forearm. Though he was so small, the man was
dragging a sled much larger than those used by the villagers, and he
had on it a heavy load of various articles. He seemed surprisingly
strong, and when they came to the shore below the village, he easily
drew the sled up the steep bank, and taking it by the rear end raised
it on the sled frame, a feat which would have required the strength of
several of the villagers.

The couple entered one of the houses and were made welcome. This small
family remained in the village for some time, the man taking his place
among the other men and seeming entirely at home and friendly. He was
very fond of his little son; but one day when the latter was playing
outside the house, he was bitten so badly by a savage dog that he
died. In his anger the father caught the dog up by the tail and struck
it against a post so violently that the dog fell in halves.

In his great sorrow, the father made a handsome, carved grave-box for
his son and placed the child with his toys in it. Then he went into
his house and for four days he did no work and would see no one. At
the end of that time he took his sled, and with his wife returned up
the river on their old trail, while the villagers sorrowfully watched
them go, for they had come to like the pair very much.

Before this time the villagers had always made the body of their sleds
from long strips of wood running lengthwise; but after they had seen
the dwarf's sled with many crosspieces, they adopted that model.

Before this time, too, they had always cast their dead out on the
tundra to be devoured by the dogs and wild beasts; but after they had
seen the dwarf people bury their son in a grave-box with toys placed
about him, they buried their dead in that way and observed four days
of mourning as had been done by the dwarf; for they liked him and his
gentle manners.

And ever since that time the hunters coming home at dusk and looking
toward the darkening tundra, sometimes see dwarf people who carry bows
and arrows, but who disappear into the ground if one tries to approach
them. They are harmless people, never attempting to do anyone an
injury. No one has ever spoken to these dwarfs since the time they
left the village; but deer hunters have often seen their tracks near
the foot of the mountains.





