THE ORIGIN OF THE NARWHAL


A long, long time ago a widow lived with her young son and daughter in
a small hut. They had a hard time to get enough to eat. But the boy
was anxious to do all he could, and while he was still quite small he
made a bow and arrows of walrus tusks which he found under the snow.
With these weapons he shot birds for their food.

He had no snow goggles and one day when the sun shone bright and he
was hunting, he became utterly blind. He had a hard time finding his
way back to the hut and when he got there without any game, his mother
was so disappointed that instead of pitying him for his blindness she
became angry with him.

From that time she ill-treated him, never giving him enough to eat. He
was a growing boy and needed a great deal of food, and she thought he
wanted more than his share, so she gave him less, and would not allow
her daughter to give him anything. So the boy lived on, half
starving, and was very unhappy.

One day a polar bear came to the hut and thrust his head right through
the window. They were all much frightened, and the mother gave the boy
his bow and arrows and told him to kill the animal.

"But I cannot see the window and I shall miss the bear. Then it will
be furious and will eat us," he said.

"Quick, brother! I will level the bow," said his sister.

So he shot and killed the bear, and the mother and sister went out and
skinned it and buried the meat in the snow.

"Don't you dare to tell your brother that he killed the bear," said
the mother. "We must make this meat last all winter."

When they went back into the hut she said to her son, "You missed the
bear. He ran away as soon as he saw you take your bow and arrow. We
have been following him a long way into the woods."

The sister did not dare to tell her brother. She and her mother lived
on the meat for a long time while the boy was nearly starving. But
sometimes when the mother was away, the girl gave him meat, for she
loved her brother dearly and used to weep because she knew he was
hungry.

One day a loon flew over the hut, and, seeing the poor blind boy at
the door, resolved to restore his eyesight. The bird perched on the
roof and kept calling, "_Quee moo! Quee moo!_" which sounded to the
lad like "Come here! Come here!"

He went out and followed the bird to the water. There the loon took
the boy on its back and dived with him to the bottom. The loon is a
great diver and can stay for a long time under water, but it knew the
boy could not. So it came to the surface soon and asked, "Can you see
anything?"

"No, I cannot see anything as yet," answered the boy.

They dove again and remained a longer time. Again when they came up
the loon asked, "Can you see now?"

"I can see a dim shimmer," replied the boy.

"Take a long, long breath and hold it while we go down," said the
loon. "When you can hold it no more, let it come out very gradually.
As soon as the bubbles of air begin to rise I will know that you must
come to the surface and will bring you."

The third time they remained a long while under water, and when they
rose to the surface the boy could see as well as ever. He thanked the
loon very heartily, and it said to him:

"Go to your home now; but promise me never again to shoot a bird."

He gladly promised, and then ran away to his hut. There he found the
skin of the bear he had shot hanging up to dry. He was so angry that
he tore it down and, entering the hut, demanded of his mother, "Where
did you get the bearskin that is hanging outside the house?"

His mother perceived that he had recovered his sight and that he
suspected the truth about the bear. She was frightened at his anger
and sought to pacify him.

"Come here," she said, "and I will give you the best I have. But I
have no one to support me and am very poor. Come here and eat this. It
is very good."

The boy did not go near. Again he asked, "Where did you get the
bearskin that I saw hanging outside the door?"

She was afraid to tell him the truth, so she said, "A boat came here
with many men in it and they gave me the skin."

The boy did not believe her story. He was sure that it was the skin
of the bear he had shot. But he said nothing more. His mother was
anxious to make peace with him, and offered him food and clothing,
which he refused to take.

He went to the other Inuit who lived in the same village and made a
spear and a harpoon of the same pattern as they used. Then he watched
them throw the harpoons, and in a short time he became an expert
hunter and could catch many white whales.

But he could not forget his anger at his mother. He said to his
sister, "I will not come home while our mother lives in the house. She
abused me while I was blind and helpless, and she mistreated you for
pitying me. We will not kill her, but we will get rid of her and then
live together. Will you do what I have planned?"

She agreed. Then he went to hunt white whales. As he had no kayak he
stood on shore, winding the end of the harpoon string around his body,
and taking a firm footing so he could hold the whale until it quieted
down and died. Sometimes his sister went along to help him hold the
line.

One day his mother went to the beach, and he tied the string around
her body and told her to take a firm footing. She was a trifle nervous
for she had never done the thing before, and she said, "Harpoon a
small dolphin, else I may not be able to hold it, if it is large
enough to make a strong pull."

After a short time a young animal came up to breathe, and she cried,
"Kill that one. I can hold it."

"No, that one is too large," he said.

Again a small dolphin came near, and the mother shouted, "Spear that."
But he said, "No, it is too large and strong."

At last a huge animal arose quite near, and immediately he threw his
harpoon, taking care to wound but not to kill it, and at the same time
pushing his mother into the water.

"That is because you abused me," he cried, as the white whale dragged
her into the sea.

Whenever she came to the surface to breathe she cried "_Louk! Louk!_"
and gradually she became transformed into a narwhal.


