THE FIRST WOMAN


"You will be very lonely by yourself," said Raven to Man one day. "I
will make you a companion."

He went to a spot some distance from where he had made the animals,
and, looking now and then at Man as an artist looks at his model, he
made an image very much like Man. He took from the creek some fine
water grass and fastened it on the back of the head for hair. After
the image had dried in his hands, he waved his wings over it as he had
done with all the live things, and it came to life and stood beside
Man, a beautiful young woman.

"There is a companion for you!" cried Raven. "Now come with me to this
knoll over here."

In those days there were no mountains far or near, and the sun never
ceased to shine brightly. No rain ever fell and no winds blew. When
they came to the knoll Raven found a patch of long, dry moss and
showed the pair how to make a bed in it, and they slept very warmly.
Raven drew down his mask and slept near by in the form of a bird.
Wakening before the others, Raven went to the creek and made three
pairs of fishes: sticklebacks, graylings, and blackfish. When they
were swimming about in the water, he called to Man, "Come and see what
I have made."

When Man saw the sticklebacks swimming up the stream with a wriggling
motion, he was so surprised that he raised his hands suddenly and the
fish darted away.

"Look at these graylings," said Raven; "they will be found in clear
mountain streams, while the sticklebacks are already on their way to
the sea. Both are good for food; so, whether you live beside the water
or in the upland, you may find plenty to eat."

He looked about and thought there was nothing on the land as lively as
the fish in the water, so he made the shrew-mice, for he said, "They
will skip about and enliven the ground and prevent it from looking
dead and barren, even if they are not good for food."

He kept on for several days making other animals, more fishes, and a
few ground birds, for as yet there were no trees for birds to alight
in. Every time he made anything he explained to Man what it was and
what it would do.

After this he flew away to the sky and was gone four days, when he
returned bringing a salmon for Man and his wife. He thought that the
ponds and lakes seemed silent and lonely, so he made insects to fly
over their surfaces, and muskrats and beavers to swim about near their
borders. At that time the mosquito did not bite as it does now, and he
said to Man:

"I made these flying creatures to enliven the world and make it
cheerful. The skin of this muskrat you are to use for clothing. The
beaver is very cunning and only good hunters can catch it. It will
live in the streams and build strong houses, and you must follow its
example and build a house."

When a child was born, Raven and Man took it to the creek and rubbed
it with clay, and carried it back to the stopping-place on the knoll.
The next morning the child was running about pulling up grass and
other plants which Raven had caused to grow near by. On the third day
the child became a full-grown man.

Raven one day went to the creek and made a bear, and gave it life; but
he jumped aside very quickly when the bear stood up and looked
fiercely about. He had thought there ought to be some animal of which
Man would be afraid, and now he was almost afraid of the bear himself.

"You would better keep away from that animal," he said. "It is very
fierce and will tear you to pieces if you disturb it."

He made various kinds of seals, and said to Man, "You are to eat these
and to take their skins for clothing. Cut some of the skins into
strips and make snares to catch deer. But you must not snare deer yet;
wait until they are more numerous."

By and by another child was born, and the Man and Woman rubbed it with
clay as Raven had taught them to do, and the next day the little girl
walked about. On the third day she was a full-grown woman, for in
those days people grew up very fast, so that the earth would be
peopled.





