THE FISHERMAN OF THE GRAUN-SEE


In following the valley of Etsch, and after leaving the village of
Haid, the traveller arrives first at the lake called Haider-See, and
then in about an hour's walking on the borders of the Graun-See,
above which on the side of the mountain, lies, in a most picturesque
situation, the little hamlet of Graun. There every garrulous old woman
or little village child can tell him how often when evening sets in the
fairies have been seen floating like flickering candles round the lofty
peak above, or heard singing sweetly on calm moonlight nights before
the entrance to their caves. This spot on the mountain bears to the
present day the name of Zur Salig (to the holy ones).

On a beautiful autumn evening some forty years ago, a fisherman in
his little barque was setting his nets in the See. The night was mild
and beautiful, and the air so clear and pure that he could distinctly
hear the sheep-bells on the surrounding mountains, and the Angelus as
it rang from the hamlets of Reschen, Graun, Haid, even as far as the
distant village of Burgeis; and the sound of the bells of the monastery
of Sancta Maria, which lies above it, came wafting solemnly and softly
over the water. The moon rose slowly in silent majesty above the
surrounding mountains, lighting up every distant peak, and turning the
lake into a bed of liquid silver, and as the distant song of the Holy
Fraeulein struck the ear of the poor fisherman, he abandoned his nets
and listened entranced.

The moonlight faded slowly away, and the darkness of night set in, yet
still he remained motionless in his boat, dreaming of the angel's song
he had heard from Heaven. Morning broke, and still he sat there with
his hand on the rudder, and his eyes riveted on the abode of the Holy
Ones. His comrades came and called him, but he did not answer; they
went to him and found him dead. He lies buried in the little churchyard
of Graun, and every villager can point out his grave.




