THE SUNKEN CASTLE IN THE BIBURG-SEE


About two miles above the village of Oetz in the Oetzthal, in the
middle mountains which cross over the valley like a wall, stands the
peak called "Biburgspitz," at the foot of which lies the little lake
of "Biburg-See." On the spot where now the See lies, used to stand
the magnificent castle of Biburg, which covered an immense expanse
of ground, and it was in former times the scene of the greatest
festivities, for a very beautiful and rich lady used to be its
mistress; yet it is sad to relate that she was a very wicked woman and
guilty of all sorts of crimes.

She had but one child, whom, like Frau Huett, she spoiled in every
point; she cleaned it, too, with new bread and cake crumbs, because
they were softer than sponges. One day a venerable hermit who had been
sent to warn the proprietress, arrived in the castle and paternally
exhorted her to give up her evil ways; but in spite of him she carried
on her wicked practices more than ever, so that the hermit went away in
despair. He had scarcely left the castle when it sank, together with
its mistress and her son, into the earth, and a calm See filled up its
place.

But a short time afterwards the lake began to bubble and boil, and the
guilty mistress of the castle rose out of it in the form of a fearful
dragon, or "Lindwurm," which in its fury bit and tore at the banks of
the See for the purpose of making an outlet for the water. This outlet
forms the little river which runs through the fields belonging to the
parishes of Oetz and Sauters; and the Tyrolians still say of little
rivers that come out of the mountains: "Here a Lindwurm has bored its
way through."




