WOLKENSTEIN


In the Groedener-Thal lie dispersed in every direction about 135 farms,
which form the parish of Wolkenstein, also called Santa Maria, and
above its pretty little chapel, on the top of the peak of Sabbiakopf,
rise the ruins of the once famous stronghold of Wolkenstein, which is
said to have been built in the time of the Romans by a pagan general,
who through his wild and cruel behaviour became the scourge of the
inhabitants of all the surrounding valleys.

One day a poor pilgrim went to the castle, asking for charity, but
the general ill-treated him so cruelly that he died, and in his last
agony the pilgrim cursed the castle, and invoked upon it immediate
destruction. Directly afterwards a huge mass of rock fell and buried
it, together with its tyrannical lord, who was not less dreaded than
the fearful Orco, whose abode lay in this country.

Some centuries later on, a wandering knight arrived in the
neighbourhood, seeking treasures in the ruins of the castle; and it is
generally believed that his search was successful, because before then
he was very poor, and now he began to build a magnificent castle upon
the old ruins, and called it also Wolkenstein. Every future proprietor
took the name of the castle, together with the title of Count, and up
to the present day the family are a wealthy, powerful, and extended
race. One of their ancestors was the celebrated Minnesinger, Oswald
von Wolkenstein, who lived in the days of "Frederick with the empty
pocket."

Later on the castle was struck by lightning, and one of the Counts
built a new castle in the valley below, and gave it the name of
Fischburg; and the old castle of Wolkenstein has since tumbled into
decay, but its magnificent and imposing ruins are still to be seen.




