THE GHOSTS OF THE CASTLE OF VOELLENBERG


Above the village of Goetzens, on the route to Arams, are to be seen the
ruins of two towers, once belonging to a castle of vast importance,
and which are called Voellenberg and Liebenberg. Two noble races used
formerly to reside in this castle, which has quite disappeared, with
the exception of the towers above named; it is from these families that
the towers derived their names. The celebrated Minnesinger Oswald von
Wolkenstein, of whom we have already spoken in the preceding legend,
was for a long time prisoner at Voellenberg.

The legend goes that the spirits of the former inhabitants are still
wandering about in those two towers; at certain times at midnight the
ruins become alive, and lords and ladies, in long sweeping dresses,
followed by liveried servants of the olden style, pass up and down the
ruinous stone staircases. Their heads are empty skulls, and they sit
down in the great castle hall, where they try in vain to drink out of
large goblets; being, however, unable to taste the beautiful wine with
which they are brimming over, they dash the goblets against the walls
and smash them into fragments.

So it happens also with their unholy feast, which is laid out most
temptingly before them on the tables; for as one of them approaches the
dish upon which he has set his mind, it falls to the ground as dust and
ashes. Then the wretched spirits endeavour to enjoy themselves with
singing and dancing; but their bones rattle so terribly, and their
companions are so frozen and stiff, that their song becomes a Miserere.

This is their punishment for all their former intemperance and
evil-doings, and this terrible scene is only brought to a close by the
ringing of the morning Angelus.




