THE THREE BROTHERS


At Reut, a village between Unken and Lofer, lived a peasant who had
three sons. The two eldest of these were hardy gazelle hunters, and
feared God as little as they did the dangers of the mountains; but the
youngest was better, and different from his brothers; he took interest
in the farm, though now and then he was induced by them to accompany
them to the chase. So it happened once that he went with them to the
high mountains, and on a Sunday they were already standing high on the
peaks when the day dawned, and at that moment they heard the Angelus
ringing from the village of Unken. The younger huntsman implored his
brothers to return, so that they might be in time for church; but as
they would not go, he did not go either.

As they mounted higher and higher they heard the mass bells ringing
at Unken; the youngest brother said, "Let us go back." But the others
jeered at him and said, "The whistle of a gazelle is more to our taste
than the mass bells and sermon." When the enthusiastic huntsmen had
arrived on the very top of the mountain, the bells rang again, and the
youngest brother said, "Listen, there is the elevation, we ought to
have been there."

But his brothers sneered at him, and replied, "A fat gemsbock here is
much more to our mind than the body of the Lord in the village church
below." These words were scarcely out of their mouths, when clouds as
black as ink enveloped the mountains, and everything became dark as
night; then came on a thunderstorm, as though the world was at its end.
After the storm was over the three brothers were found on the peak of
the mountain, turned into stones in the form of gigantic rocks, and
there they still stand, known to every little Tyrolian child under the
name of "the Three Brothers."




