THE BURNING PINES


A poor widow of Rattenberg, who was blessed with a large family, had
been, through endless misfortunes, reduced to such a pitch of poverty
that she only had left of all her possessions a small wood in the
valley of Scheibenthal, which is close to Rattenberg. A wicked-hearted
wretch took advantage of her troubles to try and prove that the wood
was his own property, and by means of false witnesses and many failures
of justice matters were driven so far that the unfortunate widow had to
give up the wood, and died of grief soon afterwards. The children were
taken care of by good neighbours, and when they were strong enough they
were obliged to go out to service, and soon no more was heard of the
matter.

Everything would have been forgotten had there not been One in whose
remembrance all lives; and up to the present day the crime of the
forest thief is constantly recalled through the circumstance that
burning trunks often roll down through the wood, sending sparks in all
directions, sometimes assuming the terrific appearance of a forest
fire. But this dreadful phenomenon is ascribed to the fact that the
wicked man, with his vile companions who had robbed the poor widow of
her wood, have been condemned to burn in the forest which they stole,
under the form of fiery pines, and roll in their agony through the
forest, vainly seeking to release themselves from their everlasting
punishment.




