THE STORY OF JOHN 0’ GROATS




He was an old seaman, with weather-beaten face and black eyes, that had
looked upon many lands and many sights.

“Well, indeed, I’ll tell you about Johnny Groats as it was told to me
one night in the trades,” he said, blowing a whiff of smoke from his
wheezy pipe.

“Well, in olden times there was a rich lord, who owned all the property
looking on to the Pentlands--an awful place in bad weather; indeed, in
any weather.

“He was a lone man, for his wife was dead, and his son had turned out to
be a rake and a spendthrift, spending all his substance upon harlots and
entertainments.

“Now this lord had a factor, by name John o’ Scales, a stingy, cunning
man, who robbed his master all he could during the week, and prayed hard
for forgiveness on the Sabbath.

“The lord, who was getting very old, was much grieved on account of his
son’s behaviour. ‘He’ll spend everything when I am gone, and the estates
will go into other hands,’ the old man said to himself.”


“One fine morning in summer the factor received orders to build a hut by
the sea, and plant bushes and trees round about it. ‘But don’t make
the door to fit close; leave the space of a foot at the bottom, so the
leaves can blow in, for I want the hut to shoot sea-fowl as they flight,
and it is cold standing on the bare ground,’ said the old man.

“The factor carried out his master’s instructions, but not without
suspicion of ulterior motives on his master’s part. However, when he saw
my lord shooting the birds and stuffing many of them his suspicions
were allayed, and the factor thought that, after all, though his master
wanted the hut for flight-shooting, still he must be getting softening
of the brain, for it was very eccentric that he should take up this new
hobby in his old age.

“So the old lord was never disturbed in his hut by curious and ill-timed
visits.

“After a time the lord died, and was laid with his fathers, the prodigal
inheriting the property.

“The old castle was then the scene of perpetual feastings and card
parties, so that in a few years the property was heavily mortgaged, the
old factor advancing the money.

“Things went apace, until one day the factor informed the young
spendthrift that he had spent everything, and the estates were no longer
his, so he gave him a few pounds, and turned him out.

“When the news spread round the countryside his old friends began to
drop off, until at last the spendthrift found every door closed against
him.

“When he had spent his last penny, the prodigal thought of the key which
his father had given him, saying, ‘When you have spent everything, take
this key, and go to the hut.’

“But he had lost the key long before.

“Nevertheless, he went to the hut. It had a deserted appearance, being
overgrown with moss and lichens.

“He managed to squeeze himself under the door, and when he stood up he
saw a rope, with a noose hanging from the centre of the roof. Pursuing
his investigations, he found a parchment nailed to the back of the door,
and in one corner stood an old three-legged stool. There was nothing
else in the damp, mouldy room, so he began to read the parchment.

“‘Thou art come to beggary; end thy miserable existence, for it is thy
father’s wish,’ he read.

“He was dazed, and looked from the parchment to the rope, and from the
rope to the parchment, saying to himself: ‘Well, I have come to that, I
must follow my father’s wish.’

“So he got the stool and put it under the noose, and standing upon it,
adjusted the rope with trembling fingers round his neck, when he said,
hoarsely: ‘Father, I do thy bidding,’ and he kicked the stool from under
him.

“Immediately he heard a crash, and found himself lying upon the leaves,
with a feeling that his neck had been jerked off. However, he soon
recovered, and, taking the noose from his neck, he looked up and saw an
open trap-door in the ceiling. Placing the stool beneath the opening,
he got on to it, and lifted himself through the trap-door, when he found
himself in a loft, a parchment nailed to the wall facing him, and on
the parchment was written, ‘This has been prepared, for your end was
foreseen, and your foolish father buried three chests of gold one foot
below the surface of the floor of the hut. Go and take it and buy back
your estate: marry, and beget an heir.’

“‘Good God! is this a ghastly joke?’ said the prodigal. But the words
looked truthful; so he tore down the parchment, dropped through the
trap-door, shut it, and readjusted the rope. He left the hut and
borrowed a pick and shovel, and returning to the hut, he began to dig,
and found one chest full of gold. When he made this discovery he closed
the chest, filled in the hole, and spread leaves over the spot. He then
ran off to his father’s best friend, and told him of his good luck. They
then called in two other friends, and consulted together how the old
lord’s wish was best to be carried out. ‘I’ll tell you,’ said his
father’s oldest friend. ‘Mr. John o’ Scales gives a great dinner party
once a month, and three of us here are invited as usual. You must come
in in the middle of dinner in your ordinary beggar clothes and beg
humbly for some food, when he will give orders to have you turned out.
Then you must begin to call him a liar and a thief, and accuse him of
robbing your father and yourself of your inheritance. You’ll see he’ll
get angry, and offer to let you have it back.’

“So the prodigal dug up the chests, and carted the money away in canvas
bags, storing it at his friend’s house.”


“When the night of the dinner party came, the prodigal drove up to the
castle in a cart filled with canvas bags. Jumping off his seat by the
driver, he went into the feast in his beggar’s clothes, and going up to
the host, he begged humbly for some food.

“‘Go from this house! What business have you here?’ asked the host.

“Most of the gentlemen and ladies began to frown upon him, and murmur
against him, as he walked to the lady of the house and begged her to
give him some food, but she replied:

“‘Oh, thou spendthrift! thou fool of fools! if all fools were hanged, as
they ought to be, you’d be the first.’

“Then the beggar’s countenance changed, a deep flush of anger overspread
his features, and drawing himself up to his full height, he said, with
solemn voice, addressing the host:

“‘Thou hast robbed my father all the days of his life, and thou hast
robbed the orphan. May the curse of God be upon you!’

“The host grew furious; then he looked ashamed, and shouted angrily:

“‘Bring me £40,000, and you shall have your estate back. I never robbed
you, but you lost your inheritance by your own follies.’

“‘Gentlemen,’ said the beggar, ‘I take you all to witness that this
thief says I can have my estate back for £40,000.’

“The people murmured, and the three friends said: ‘We are witnesses.’

“The beggar ran out into the night, and returned with a man laden with
sacks, and they began to count out £40,000 upon a side-table, where a
haunch of venison still smoked.

“When they had counted out the money, the beggar said:

“‘There is your £40,000; sign this receipt.’

“The amazed factor drew back, when the three friends said:

“‘You must sign; you are a gentleman of your word, of course.’

“Mechanically John o’ Scales signed the paper.

“‘And now,’ said the former beggar, ‘leave my house at once, with your
wife--you coward! you cur! You robbed my father, and then cheated me
when I was a spendthrift. Begone, and may your name be accursed in the
land!’

“And the son turned all out except his three friends.

“In a few months he married the daughter of one of his friends; but
he never gambled again, only entertaining his three friends and their
families, who came and went as they liked.

“And from that day John o’ Scales was called John o’ Groats.”




