LEGEND OF THE ALTAR DEL PERDON


This painter, Senor, who by a miracle painted the most beautiful
picture of Our Lady of Mercy that is to be found in the whole
world--the very picture that ever since has adorned the Altar del
Perdon in the Cathedral--in the beginning of him was a very bad
sinner: being a Fleming, and a Jew, and many other things that he
ought not to have been, and therefore straight in the way to pass the
whole of Eternity--his wickednesses being so numerous that time would
have been wasted in trying to purge him of them in Purgatory--in the
hottest torments that the devil his master could contrive. He was a
very agreeable young gentleman, of a cheerful and obliging nature, and
both witty and interesting in his talkings--for which reason the
Viceroy had a great liking for his company and had him often at the
Palace to the banquets and the festivals of the court. His name,
Senor, was Don Simon Peyrens; and the Viceroy his patron--in whose
suite he had come from Spain expressly to beautify the Palace with his
paintings--was Don Gaston de Peralta, Marques de Falces: who was the
third Viceroy of the Province, being the successor to the good Don
Luis de Velasco when that most worthy gentleman ceased to be a Viceroy
and became an angel in the year 1564.

Well, Senor, it happened some years later--in the time of Don Martin
Enriquez de Almanza, the fourth Viceroy, with whom Peyrens remained in
favor--that the Chapter of the Cathedral, desiring to make splendid
the Altar del Perdon, offered in competition to all the painters of
Mexico a prize for the most beautiful picture of Our Lady of Mercy:
which picture was to be placed in the centre of that altar and to be
the chief glory of it. And, thereupon, all the painters of Mexico,
save only Peyrens, entered into that competition with a reverent and
an eager joy. And then it was, Senor, that Peyrens made plain the
wickedness that was in him by his irreverent blasphemies. At a banquet
at the Palace a very noble gentleman asked him why he alone of all
the painters of Mexico--and he the best of all of them--had not
entered into the competition; to which that sinful young man answered
with a disdainful and impious lightness that the painting of what were
called sacred pictures was but foolishness and vanity, and that he for
his part could not be tempted to paint one by all the gold in the
world!

Talk of that sort, Senor, as you well may imagine, scalded the ears of
all who heard it--and in the quarter where the punishment of such
sinning was attended to it made an instant stir. In a moment
information of that evil young man's utterances was carried to the
Archbishop--who at that time was the venerable Fray Alonzo de
Montufar--and in another moment he found himself lodged behind iron
bars in a cell in the Inquisition: that blessed constrainer to
righteousness, for the comforting of the faithful, that then was
proving its usefulness by mowing down the weeds of heresy with a very
lively zeal.

Being of an incredible hard-heartedness, neither the threats nor the
pleadings of the Familiars of the Holy Office could stir Peyrens from
the stand that he had taken. Resolutely he refused to recant his
blasphemies; equally resolutely he refused to accept his freedom on
the condition that he should paint the picture of Our Lady--and he
even went so far, when they brought him the materials for the making
of that picture, as to tear the canvas to shreds and rags!

And so the days ran on into weeks, and the weeks into months, and
nothing changed in that bad matter: save that the Archbishop, saintly
man that he was, began to lose his temper; and that the Familiars of
the Holy Office lost their tempers entirely--and were for settling
accounts with Peyrens by burning his wickedness out of him with
heavenly fire.

As it happened, Senor, a great opportunity for such wholesome
purifying of him was imminent: because at that time the preparations
were being made for the very first auto de fe that ever was celebrated
in Mexico, and all the City was on tiptoe of joyful expectation of it.
Therefore everybody was looking forward with a most pleased interest
to seeing that criminally stiff-necked painter--properly clad in a
yellow coat with a red cross on the back and on the front of
it--walking with the condemned ones; and then, on the brasero that had
been set up in the market-place, to seeing him and his sins together
burned to ashes; and then to seeing those sin-tainted ashes carried to
the outskirts of the City and scattered pollutingly on the muddy
marsh.

However, Senor, none of those interesting and edifying things
happened: because Our Lady of Mercy--and it was just like the
good-nature of her to do so--took a hand in the affair, and by the
working of a loving miracle made everything come out smoothly and
well.

On a night, as he lay sleeping on his pallet in his cell in the
Inquisition, Peyrens was awakened suddenly he knew not how; and as he
wakened he found in his nose a smell so delectable that he thought
that he still was asleep and his nose dreaming it: and for him to have
that thought was quite reasonable, Senor, because it was the pure
fragrance of heaven--to which, of course, human noses are
unaccustomed--that filled the room. Then, as he lay on his pallet
wondering, a shimmering light began to glow softly in the darkness;
and the light constantly grew stronger and stronger until it became a
glorious radiance far brighter than any sunlight; and then in the
midst of that resplendency--yet the heavenly sparkle of her making the
dazzle of it seem like darkness--Our Lady of Mercy herself appeared to
him: and he would have died of the glory of her, had it not been for
the loving kindness that shone upon him assuringly and comfortingly
from her gentle eyes.

Then said to him Our Lady, in a voice sweeter than any earthly music:
"Little son, why dost thou not love me?" And Peyrens--his hard heart
melted by that gentle look and by that sweet voice, and all of his
wickedness cured by that loving kindness--rose from his pallet and
knelt before Our Lady, saying with a deep earnestness: "Queen of
Heaven, I reverence and I love thee with all the heart of me and with
all my soul!" Then, for a time, a serene strange happiness bemazed him
dream-fully--and when his bemazement left him the resplendent presence
was gone. But with him still remained the heavenly radiance that was
brighter than any sunlight, and the heavenly perfume that was sweeter
than spikenard and lilies; and while he pondered all these mysteries,
awe-bound and wondering, again sounded in his ears that heaven-sweet
voice--coming as from a great distance, but with a bell-note
clearness--saying to him gently and lovingly: "Paint now thy picture
of me, little son!"

Quite possibly, Senor, in the hurry of the moment, Our Lady forgot
that Peyrens had no canvas--because in his sinful anger he had
destroyed it--on which to paint the picture that she commanded of him;
but, for myself, I think that she meant to set his wits to work to
find the means by which he could obey her command. At any rate, his
wits did work so well that even as she spoke he saw his way out of his
difficulty; and in an instant--all a-thrill with joyful eagerness to
do Our Lady's bidding, and inspired by the splendor of his vision of
her--he set himself to painting the portrait of her, just as his own
eyes had seen her in her glory, on the oaken door of his cell.

All the night long, Senor--working by the heaven-light that was
brighter than any sunlight, and having in his happy nose the heaven
fragrance that uplifted his soul with the sweetness of it--he painted
as one who painted in a heaven-sent dream. And when the morning came,
and the glimmering daylight took dimly the place of the heaven-light,
he had finished there on the door of his cell the most beautiful
picture of Our Lady--as I said in the beginning--that ever has been
painted in this mortal world: and so it had to be--because, you see,
it is the only picture of her that ever has been painted of her by one
who has beheld her with mortal eyes!

As usually is the case with miracles, Senor, the outcome of this one
was most satisfactory. The Archbishop and the Chapter of the
Cathedral, being brought in haste, instantly felt themselves compelled
to adore that miraculous image; and when they had finished adoring it
they equally felt themselves compelled to declare that Peyrens by his
making of it had earned both his freedom and the prize. Therefore
Peyrens was set at liberty and most richly rewarded; and the pictured
door was taken from its hinges and, being framed in a great frame of
silver, was set upon the Altar del Perdon to be the chief glory of it;
and what was best of all--because it made safe the soul of him for all
Eternity--the Archbishop formally confirmed to Peyrens his
absolution, through Our Lady's loving kindness, from his bad heresy
and from all his other sins.

What became of this Peyrens later, Senor, I have not heard mentioned;
but in regard to the accuracy of all that I have told you about him
there can be no question: because the miracle-picture that he painted
still adorns the Altar del Perdon, and is the chief glory of it--and
there you may see it this very day.




