IMPERISHABLE



Once upon a time, ever so many years ago, there lived a little old man
and a little old woman. Very old indeed were they, for they had lived
nearly a hundred years. But they took neither joy nor pleasure in
anything, and this because they had no children. They were now about
to keep the seventy-fifth anniversary of their wedding day, known as
the Diamond Wedding, but no guests were invited to share their simple
feast.

As they sat side by side they went over in memory the years of their
long life, and as they did so they felt sure that it was to punish
them for their sins that God had denied them the sweet happiness of
having children about them, and as they thought their tears fell fast.
At that moment some one knocked.

"Who is there?" cried the old woman, and ran to open the door. There
stood a little old man leaning on a stick, and white as a dove.

"What do you want?" asked the old woman.

"Charity," answered he.

The good old woman was kind-hearted, and she cut her last loaf in two,
giving one half to the beggar, who said, "I see you have been weeping,
good wife, and I know the reason of your tears; but cheer up, by God's
grace you shall be comforted. Though poor and childless to-day,
to-morrow you shall have family and fortune."

When the old woman heard this she was overjoyed, and fetching her
husband they both went to the door to invite the old man in. But he
was gone, and though they searched for him in every direction they
found nothing but his stick lying on the ground. For it was not a poor
old beggar, but an angel of God who had knocked. Our good friends did
not know this, so they picked up the stick and hurried off to find the
old man, with the purpose of returning it. But it seemed as if the
stick, like its master, were endowed with some marvellous power, for
whenever the old man or the old woman tried to pick it up it slipped
out of their hands and rolled along the ground. Thus they followed it
into a forest, and at the foot of a shrub which stood close by a
stream it disappeared. They hunted all round the shrub thinking to
find the stick there, but instead of the stick they came upon a bird's
nest containing twelve eggs, and from the shape of the shells it
seemed as if the young ones were ready to come forth.

"Pick up the eggs," said the old man, "they will make us an omelette
for our wedding feast."

The old woman grumbled a little, but she took the nest and carried it
home in the skirt of her gown. Fancy their astonishment when at the
end of twelve hours there came out, not unfledged birdlings, but
twelve pretty little boys. Then the shells broke into tiny fragments
which were changed into as many gold pieces. Thus, as had been
foretold, the old man and his wife found both family and fortune.

Now these twelve boys were most extraordinary children. Directly they
came out of the shells they seemed to be at least three months old,
such a noise did they make, crying and kicking about. The youngest of
all was a very big baby with black eyes, red cheeks, and curly hair,
and so lively and active that the old woman could hardly keep him in
his cradle at all. In twelve hours' time the children seemed to be a
year old, and could walk about and eat anything.

Then the old woman made up her mind that they should be baptized, and
thereupon sent her husband to fetch priest and organist without delay;
and the diamond wedding was celebrated at the same time as the
christening. For a short time their joy was clouded over by the
disappearance of the youngest boy, who was also the best-looking, and
his parents' favourite. They had begun to weep and mourn for him as if
he were lost, when suddenly he was seen to come from out of the
sleeves of the priest's cassock, and was heard to speak these words:
"Never fear, dear parents, your beloved son will not perish."

The old woman kissed him fondly and handed him to his godfather, who
presented him to the priest. So they had named him _Niezguinek_, that
is, _Imperishable_. The twelve boys went on growing at the rate of six
weeks every hour, and at the end of two years were fine strong young
men. Niezguinek, especially, was of extraordinary size and strength.
The good old people lived happily and peacefully at home while their
sons worked in the fields. On one occasion the latter went ploughing;
and while the eleven eldest used the ordinary plough and team of oxen,
Niezguinek made his own plough, and it had twelve ploughshares and
twelve handles, and to it were harnessed twelve team of the strongest
working oxen. The others laughed at him, but he did not mind, and
turned up as much ground as his eleven brothers together.

Another time when they went haymaking and his brothers used the
ordinary scythes, he carried one with twelve blades, and managed it so
cleverly, in spite of the jests of his companions, that he cut as much
grass as all of them together. And again, when they went to turn over
the hay, Niezguinek used a rake with twelve teeth, and so cleared
twelve plots of ground with every stroke. His haycock, too, was as
large as a hill in comparison with those of his brothers. Now, the day
after the making of the haycocks the old man and his wife happened to
be in the fields, and they noticed that one haycock had disappeared;
so thinking wild horses had made off with it, they advised their sons
to take turns in watching the place.

The eldest took his turn first, but after having watched all night
fell asleep towards morning, when he awoke to find another haycock
missing. The second son was not more fortunate in preventing the
disappearance of the hay, while the others succeeded no better; in
fact, of all the twelve haycocks, there only remained the largest,
Niezguinek's, and even that had been meddled with.

When it was the youngest's turn to watch, he went to the village
blacksmith and got him to make an iron club weighing two hundred and
sixty pounds; so heavy was it that the blacksmith and his assistants
could hardly turn it on the anvil. In order to test it, Niezguinek
whirled it round his head and threw it up in the air, and when it had
nearly reached the ground he caught it on his knee, upon which it was
smashed to atoms. He then ordered another weighing four hundred and
eighty pounds, and this the blacksmith and his men could not even
move. Niezguinek had helped them to make it, and when finished he
tested it in the same manner as the first. Finding it did not break he
kept it, and had in addition a noose plaited with twelve strong ropes.
Towards nightfall he went to the field, crouched down behind his
haycock, crossed himself, and waited to see what would happen. At
midnight there was a tremendous noise which seemed to come from the
east, while in that direction appeared a bright light. Then a white
mare, with twelve colts as white as herself, trotted up to the haycock
and began to eat it. Niezguinek came out of his hiding-place, and
throwing the noose over the mare's neck, jumped on her back and struck
her with his heavy club. The terrified creature gave the signal to the
colts to escape, but she herself, hindered by the noose, out of
breath, and wounded by the club, could not follow, but sank down on
the earth saying, "Do not choke me, Niezguinek."

He marvelled to hear her speak human language, and loosened the noose.
When she had taken breath she said, "Knight, if you give me my liberty
you shall never repent it. My husband, the Dappled Horse with Golden
Mane, will cruelly revenge himself upon you when he knows I am your
prisoner; his strength and swiftness are so great you could not escape
him. In exchange for my freedom I will give you my twelve colts, who
will serve you and your brothers faithfully."

On hearing their mother neigh the colts returned and stood with bent
heads before the young man, who released the mare, and led them home.
The brothers were delighted to see Niezguinek return with twelve
beautiful white horses, and each took the one that pleased his fancy
most, while the thinnest and weakest-looking was left for the
youngest.

The old couple were happy in the thought that their son was brave as
well as strong. One day it occurred to the old woman that she would
like to see them all married, and to have the house merry with her
daughters-in-law and their children. So she called upon her gossips
and friends to talk the matter over, and finally persuaded her husband
to be of the same opinion. He called his sons around him and addressed
them thus: "Listen to me, my sons: in a certain country lives a
celebrated witch known as old Yaga. She is lame, and travels about in
an oaken trough. She supports herself on iron crutches, and when she
goes abroad carefully removes all traces of her steps with a broom.
This old witch has twelve beautiful daughters who have large dowries;
do your best to win them for your wives. Do not return without
bringing them with you."

Both parents blessed their sons, who, mounting their horses, were soon
out of sight. All but Niezguinek, who, left alone, went to the stable
and began to shed tears.

"Why do you weep?" asked his horse.

"Don't you think I have good reason?" replied he. "Here I have to go a
long long way in search of a wife, and you, my friend, are so thin and
weak that were I to depend upon your strength I should never be able
to join my brothers."

"Do not despair, Niezguinek," said the horse, "not only will you
overtake your brothers, but you will leave them far behind. I am the
son of the Dappled Horse with the Golden Mane, and if you will do
exactly as I tell you I shall be given the same power as he. You must
kill me and bury me under a layer of earth and manure, then sow some
wheat over me, and when the corn is ripe it must be gathered and some
of it placed near my body."

Niezguinek threw his arms round his horse's neck and kissed him
fondly, then led him into a yard and killed him with one blow of his
club. The horse staggered a moment and then fell dead. His master
covered him with a layer of manure and earth, upon which he sowed
wheat, as had been directed. It was immediately watered by a gentle
rain, and warmed by the heat of the sun's rays. The corn took root and
ripened so quickly that on the twelfth day Niezguinek set to work to
cut, thresh, and winnow it. So abundant was it that he was able to
give eleven measures to his parents, and keeping one for himself,
spread it before his horse's bones. In a very short time the horse
moved his head, sniffed the air, and began to devour the wheat. As
soon as it was finished he sprang up, and was so full of life that he
wanted to jump over the fence in one bound: but Niezguinek held him by
the mane, and getting lightly on his back, said: "Halt there, my
spirited steed, I do not want others to have the benefit of all the
trouble I have had with you. Carry me to old Yaga's house."

He was of a truth a most magnificent horse, big and strong, with eyes
that flashed like lightning. He leapt up into the air as high as the
clouds, and the next moment descended in the middle of a field, saying
to his master: "As we have first to see old Yaga, from whom we are
still a great way off, we can stop here for a short time: take food
and rest, I will do the same. Your brothers will be obliged to pass
us, for we are a good way in front of them. When they come you can go
on together to visit the old witch: remember, though it is difficult
to get into her house, it is much more difficult still to get out. But
if you would be perfectly safe, take from under my saddle a brush, a
scarf, and a handkerchief. They will be of use in helping you to
escape; for when you unroll the scarf, a river will flow between you
and your enemy; if you shake the brush it will become a thick forest;
and by waving the handkerchief it will be changed into a lake. After
you have been received into Yaga's house, and your brothers have
stabled their horses and gone to bed, I will tell you how to act."

For twelve days Niezguinek and his horse rested and gained strength,
and at the end of the time the eleven brothers came up. They wondered
greatly to see the youngest, and said, "Where on earth did you come
from? And whose horse is that?"

"I have come from home. The horse is the same I chose at first. We
have been waiting here twelve days; let us go on together now."

Within a short time they came to a house surrounded by a high oaken
paling, at the gate of which they knocked. Old Yaga peeped out through
a chink in the fence and cried, "Who are you? What do you want?"

"We are twelve brothers come to ask the twelve daughters of Yaga in
marriage. If she is willing to be our mother-in-law, let her open the
door."

The door was opened and Yaga appeared. She was a frightful-looking
creature, old as the hills; and being one of those monsters who feed
on human flesh, the unfortunate wretches who once entered her house
never came out again. She had a lame leg, and because of this she
leaned on a great iron crutch, and when she went out removed all
traces of her steps with a broom.

She received the young travellers very graciously, shut the gate of
the courtyard behind them, and led them into the house. Niezguinek's
brothers dismounted, and taking their horses to the stables, tied them
up to rings made of silver; the youngest fastened his to a copper
ring. The old witch served her guests with a good supper, and gave
them wine and hydromel to drink. Then she made up twelve beds on the
right side of the room for the travellers, and on the left side twelve
beds for her daughters.

All were soon asleep except Niezguinek. He had been warned beforehand
by his horse of the danger that threatened them, and now he got up
quietly and changed the positions of the twenty-four beds, so that the
brothers lay to the left side of the room, and Yaga's daughters to the
right. At midnight, old Yaga cried out in a hoarse voice, "Guzla,
play. Sword, strike."

Then were heard strains of sweet music, to which the old woman beat
time from her oaken trough. At the same moment a slender sword
descended into the room, and passing over to the beds on the right,
cut off the heads of the girls one by one: after which it danced about
and flashed in the darkness.

When the dawn broke the guzla ceased playing, the sword disappeared,
and silence reigned. Then Niezguinek softly aroused his brothers, and
they all went out without making any noise. Each mounted his horse,
and when they had broken open the yard gate they made their escape at
full speed. Old Yaga, thinking she heard footsteps, got up and ran
into the room where her daughters lay dead. At the dreadful sight she
gnashed her teeth, barked like a dog, tore out her hair by handfuls,
and seating herself in her trough as in a car, set off after the
fugitives. She had nearly reached them, and was already stretching out
her hand to seize them, when Niezguinek unrolled his magic scarf, and
instantly a deep river flowed between her and the horsemen. Not being
able to cross it she stopped on the banks, and howling savagely began
to drink it up.

"Before you have swallowed all that river you will burst, you wicked
old witch," cried Niezguinek. Then he rejoined his brothers.

But the old woman drank all the water, crossed the bed of the river in
her trough, and soon came near the young people. Niezguinek shook his
handkerchief, and a lake immediately spread out between them. So she
was again obliged to stop, and shrieking with rage began to drink up
the water.

"Before you have drunk that lake dry you will have burst yourself,"
said Niezguinek, and rode after his brothers.

The old vixen drank up part of the water, and turning the remainder
into a thick fog, hastened along in her trough. She was once more
close upon the young men when Niezguinek, without a moment's delay,
seized his brush, and as he waved it in the air a thick forest rose
between them. For a time the witch was at a loss to know what to do.
On one side she saw Niezguinek and his brothers rapidly disappearing,
while she stood on the other hindered by the branches and torn by the
thorns of the thick bushes, unable either to advance or retreat.
Foaming with rage, with fire flashing from her eyes, she struck right
and left with her crutches, crashing trees on all sides, but before
she could clear a way those she was in pursuit of had got more than a
hundred miles ahead.

So she was forced to give up, and grinding her teeth, howling, and
tearing out her hair, she threw after the fugitives such flaming
glances from her eyes that she set the forest on fire, and taking the
road home was soon lost to sight.

The travellers, seeing the flames, guessed what had happened, and
thanked God for having preserved them from such great dangers. They
continued their journey, and by eventide arrived at the top of a steep
hill. There they saw a town besieged by foreign troops, who had
already destroyed the outer part, and only awaited daylight to take it
by storm.

The twelve brothers kept out of sight behind the enemy; and when they
had rested and turned out their horses to graze all went to sleep
except Niezguinek, who kept watch without closing an eye. When
everything was perfectly still he got up, and calling his horse, said,
"Listen; yonder in that tent sleeps the king of this besieging army,
and he dreams of the victory he hopes for on the morrow: how could we
send all the soldiers to sleep and get possession of his person?"

The horse replied, "You will find some dried leaves of the herb of
Sleep in the pocket of the saddle. Mount upon my back and hover round
the camp, spreading fragments of the plant. That will cause all the
soldiers to fall into a sound sleep, after which you can carry out
your plans."

Niezguinek mounted his horse, pronouncing these magic words:

  "Marvel of strength and of beauty so white,
    Horse of my heart, let us go;
  Rise in the air, like a bird take thy flight,
    Haste to the camp of the foe."

The horse glanced upwards as if he saw some one beckoning to him from
the clouds, then rose rapidly as a bird on the wing and hovered over
the camp. Niezguinek took handfuls of the herb of Sleep from the
saddle-pockets and sprinkled it all about. Upon which all in the camp,
including the sentinels, fell at once into a heavy sleep. Niezguinek
alighted, entered the tent, and carried off the sleeping king without
any difficulty. He then returned to his brothers, unharnessed his
horse and lay down to rest, placing the royal prisoner near him. His
majesty slept on as if nothing unusual had taken place.

At daybreak the soldiers of the besieging army awoke, and not being
able to find their king, were seized with such a panic of terror that
they retreated in great disorder. The ruler of the besieged city would
not at first believe that the enemy had really disappeared, and indeed
went himself to see if it was true: of a truth there remained nothing
of the enemy's camp but a few deserted tents whitening on the plain.
At that moment Niezguinek came up with his brothers, and said, "Sire,
the enemy has fled, and we were unable to detain them, but here is
their king whom we have made prisoner, and whom I deliver up to you."

The ruler replied, "I see, indeed, that you are a brave man among
brave men, and I will reward you. This royal prisoner is worth a large
ransom to me; so speak,--what would you like me to do for you?"

"I should wish, sire, that my brothers and I might enter the service
of your majesty."

"I am quite willing," answered the king. Then, having placed his
prisoner in charge of his guards, he made Niezguinek general, and
placed him at the head of a division of his army; the eleven brothers
were given the rank of officers.

When Niezguinek appeared in uniform, and with sabre in hand mounted
his splendid charger, he looked so handsome and conducted the
manoeuvres so well that he surpassed all the other chiefs in the
country, thus causing much jealousy, even among his own brothers, for
they were vexed that the youngest should outshine them, and so
determined to ruin him.

In order to accomplish this they imitated his handwriting, and placed
such a note before the king's door while Niezguinek was engaged
elsewhere. When the king went out he found the letter, and calling
Niezguinek to him, said, "I should very much like to have the phonic
guzla you mention in your letter."

"But, sire, I have not written anything about a guzla," said he.

"Read the note then. Is it not in your handwriting?"

Niezguinek read:

    "In a certain country, within the house of old Yaga, is a
    marvellous guzla: if the king wish I will fetch it for him.

                                            "(Signed) NIEZGUINEK."

"It is true," said he, "that this writing resembles mine, but it is a
forgery, for I never wrote it."

"Never mind," said the king, "as you were able to take my enemy
prisoner you will certainly be able to succeed in getting old Yaga's
guzla: go then, and do not return without it, or you will be
executed."

Niezguinek bowed and went out. He went straight to the stable, where
he found his charger looking very sad and thin, his head drooping
before the trough, the hay untouched.

"What is the matter with you, my good steed? What grieves you?"

"I grieve for us both, for I foresee a long and perilous journey."

"You are right, old fellow, but we have to go. And what is more, we
have to take away and bring here old Yaga's guzla; and how shall we do
it, seeing that she knows us?"

"We shall certainly succeed if you do as I tell you."

Then the horse gave him certain instructions, and when Niezguinek had
led him out of the stable and mounted he said:

  "Marvel of strength and of beauty so white,
    Horse of my heart, do not wait on the road;
  Rise in the air, like a bird take thy flight,
    Haste to the wicked old Yaga's abode."

The horse arose in the air as if he heard some one calling to him from
the clouds, and flitting rapidly along passed over several kingdoms
within a few hours, thus reaching old Yaga's dwelling before midnight.
Niezguinek threw the leaves of Sleep in at the window, and by means of
another wonderful herb caused all the doors of the house to open. On
entering he found old Yaga fast asleep, with her trough and iron
crutches beside her, while above her head hung the magic sword and
guzla.

While the old witch lay snoring with all her might, Niezguinek took
the guzla and leapt on his horse, crying:

  "Marvel of strength and of beauty so white,
    Horse of my heart, while I sing,
  Rise in the air, like a bird take thy flight,
    Haste to the court of my king."

Just as if the horse had seen something in the clouds, he rose swift
as an arrow, and flew through the air, above the fogs. The same day
about noon he neighed before his own manger in the royal stable, and
Niezguinek went in to the king and presented him with the guzla. On
pronouncing the two words, "Guzla, play," strains of music so gay and
inspiriting were heard that all the courtiers began dancing with one
another. The sick who listened were cured of their diseases, those who
were in trouble and grief forgot their sorrows, and all living
creatures were thrilled with a gladness such as they had never felt
before. The king was beside himself with joy; he loaded Niezguinek
with honours and presents, and, in order to have him always at court,
raised him to a higher rank in the army. In this new post he had many
under him, and he showed much exactitude in drill and other matters,
punishing somewhat severely when necessary. He made, too, no
difference in the treatment of his brothers, which angered them
greatly, and caused them to be still more jealous and to plot against
him. So they again imitated his handwriting and composed another
letter, which they left at the king's door. When his majesty had read
it he called Niezguinek to him and said, "I should much like to have
the marvellous sword you speak of in your letter."

"Sire, I have not written anything about a sword," said Niezguinek.

"Well, read it for yourself." And he read:

    "In a certain country within the house of old Yaga is a
    sword that strikes of its own accord: if the king would like
    to have it, I will engage to bring it him.

                                            "(Signed) NIEZGUINEK."

"Certainly," said Niezguinek, "this writing resembles mine, but I
never wrote those words."

"Never mind, as you succeeded in bringing me the guzla you will find
no difficulty in obtaining the sword. Start without delay, and do not
return without it at your peril."

Niezguinek bowed and went to the stable, where he found his horse
looking very thin and miserable, with his head drooping.

"What is the matter, my horse? Do you want anything?"

"I am unhappy because I foresee a long and dangerous journey."

"You are right, for we are ordered to return to Yaga's house for the
sword: but how can we get hold of it? doubtless she guards it as the
apple of her eye."

The horse answered, "Do as I tell you and all will be right." And he
gave him certain instructions. Niezguinek came out of the stable,
saddled his friend, and mounting him said:

  "Marvel of strength and of beauty so white;
    Horse of my heart, do not wait on the road;
  Rise in the air, like a bird take thy flight,
    Haste to the wicked old witch's abode."

The horse rose immediately as if he had been beckoned to by some one
in the clouds, and passing swiftly through the air, crossed rivers and
mountains, till at midnight he stopped before old Yaga's house.

Since the disappearance of the guzla the sword had been placed on
guard before the house, and whoever came near it was cut to pieces.

Niezguinek traced a circle with holy chalk, and placing himself on
horseback in the centre of it, said:

  "Sword who of thyself can smite,
    I come to brave thy ire;
  Peace or war upon this site
    Of thee I do require.
  If thou canst conquer, thine my life;
  Should I beat thee, then ends this strife."

The sword clinked, leapt into the air, and fell to the ground divided
into a thousand other swords, which ranged themselves in battle array
and began to attack Niezguinek. But in vain; they were powerless to
touch him; for on reaching the chalk-traced circle they broke like
wisps of straw. Then the sword-in-chief, seeing how useless it was to
go on trying to wound him, submitted itself to Niezguinek and promised
him obedience. Taking the magic weapon in his hand, he mounted his
horse and said:

  "Marvel of strength and of beauty so white,
    Horse of my heart, while I sing,
  Rise in the air, like a bird take thy flight,
    Back to the court of my king."

The horse started with renewed courage, and by noon was eating his hay
in the royal stables. Niezguinek went in to the king and presented him
with the sword. While he was rejoicing over it one of his servants
rushed in quite out of breath and said, "Sire, your enemies who
attacked us last year, and whose king is your prisoner, surround our
town. Being unable to redeem their sovereign, they have come with an
immense army, and threaten to destroy us if their king is not released
without ransom."

The king armed himself with the magic sword, and going outside the
city walls, said to it, as he pointed to the enemy's camp, "Magic
Sword, smite the foe."

Immediately the sword clinked, leapt flashing in the air, and fell in
a thousand blades that threw themselves on the camp. One regiment was
destroyed during the first attack, another was defeated in the same
way, while the rest of the terrified soldiers fled and completely
disappeared. Then the king said, "Sword, return to me."

The thousand swords again became one, and so it returned to its
master's hand.

The victorious king came home filled with joy. He called Niezguinek to
him, loaded him with gifts, and assuring him of his favour, made him
the highest general of his forces. In carrying out the duties of this
new post Niezguinek was often obliged to punish his brothers, who
became more and more enraged against him, and took counsel together
how they might bring about his downfall.

One day the king found a letter by his door, and after reading it he
called Niezguinek to him and said, "I should very much like to see
Princess Sudolisu, whom you wish to bring me."

"Sire, I do not know the lady, and have never spoken to her."

"Here, look at your letter."

Niezguinek read:

    "Beyond the nine kingdoms, far beyond the ocean, within a
    silver vessel with golden masts lives Princess Sudolisu. If
    the king wishes it, I will seek her for him.

                                             (Signed) NIEZGUINEK."

"It is true the writing is like unto mine; nevertheless, I neither
composed the letter nor wrote it."

"No matter," answered the king. "You will be able to get this
princess, as you did the guzla and the sword: if not, I will have you
killed."

Niezguinek bowed and went out. He entered the stable where stood his
horse looking very weak and sad, with his head bent down.

"What is the matter, dear horse? Are you in want of anything?"

"I am sorrowful," answered the horse, "because I foresee a long and
difficult journey."

"You are right, for we have to go beyond the nine kingdoms, and far
beyond the ocean, to find Princess Sudolisu. Can you tell me what to
do?"

"I will do my best, and if it is God's will we shall succeed. Bring
your club of four hundred and eighty pounds weight, and let us be
off."

Niezguinek saddled his horse, took his club, and mounting said:

  "Marvel of strength and of beauty so white,
    Horse of my heart, do not lag on the road;
  Rise in the air, through the clouds take thy flight,
    Haste to Princess Sudolisu's abode."

Then the horse looked up as if there were something he wanted in the
clouds, and with a spring flew through the air, swift as an arrow; and
so by the second day they had passed over ten kingdoms, and finding
themselves beyond the ocean, halted on the shore. Here the horse said
to Niezguinek, "Do you see that silver ship with golden masts that
rides on the waves yonder? That beautiful vessel is the home of
Princess Sudolisu, youngest daughter of old Yaga. For after the witch
had lost the guzla and magic sword she feared to lose her daughter
too: so she shut her up in that vessel, and having thrown the key
thereof into the ocean, sat herself in her oaken trough, where with
the help of the iron crutches she rows round and round the silver
ship, warding off tempests, and keeping at a distance all other ships
that would approach it.

"The first thing to be done is to get the diamond key that opens the
ship. In order to procure this you must kill me, and then throw into
the water one end of my entrails, by which bait you will trap the King
of the Lobsters. Do not set him free until he has promised to get you
the key, for it is this key that draws the vessel to you of its own
accord."

"Ah, my beloved steed," cried Niezguinek, "how can I kill you when I
love you as my own brother, and when my fate depends upon you
entirely?"

"Do as I tell you; you can bring me to life again, as you did before."

Niezguinek caressed his horse, kissed him and wept over him; then,
raising his mighty club, struck him full on the forehead. The poor
creature staggered and fell down dead. Niezguinek cut him open, and
putting an end of his entrails in the water, he kept hold of it and
hid himself in the water-rushes. Soon there came a crowd of crawfish,
and amongst them a gigantic lobster as large as a year-old calf.
Niezguinek seized him and threw him on the beach. The lobster said, "I
am king of all the crawfish tribe. Let me go, and I will give you
great riches for my ransom."

"I do not want your riches," answered Niezguinek, "but in exchange for
your freedom give me the diamond key which belongs to the silver ship
with the golden masts, for in that vessel dwells Princess Sudolisu."

The King of the Crawfish whistled, upon which myriads of his subjects
appeared. He spoke to them in their own language, and dismissed one,
who soon returned with the magic diamond key in his claws.

Niezguinek loosed the King of the Crawfish; and hiding himself inside
his horse's body as he had been instructed, lay in wait. At that
moment an old raven, followed by all his nestlings, happened to pass,
and attracted by the horse's carcase, he called to his young ones to
come and feast with him. Niezguinek seized the smallest of the birds
and held it firmly.

"Let my birdling go," said the old raven, "I will give you in return
anything you like to ask."

"Fetch me then three kinds of water, the Life-giving, the Curing, and
the Strengthening."

The old raven started off, and while awaiting his return Niezguinek,
who still held the ravenling, questioned him as to where he had come
from and what he had seen on his travels, and in this way heard news
of his brothers.

When the father bird returned, carrying with him the bottles filled
with the marvellous waters, he wanted to have his nestling back.

"One moment more," said Niezguinek, "I want to be sure that they are
of the right sort."

Then he replaced the entrails in the body of his horse and sprinkled
him first with the Life-giving, then with the Curing, and finally with
the Strengthening Water; after which his beloved steed leapt to his
feet full of strength and cried, "Ah! how very soundly I have slept."

Niezguinek released the young raven and said to his horse, "For sure,
you would have slept to all eternity, and have never seen the sun
again, if I had not revived you as you taught me."

While speaking he saw the marvellous ship sparkling white in the sun.
She was made entirely of pure silver, with golden masts. The rigging
was of silk, the sails of velvet, and the whole was enclosed in a
casing of inpenetrable steel network. Niezguinek sprang down to the
water's edge armed with his club, and rubbing his forehead with the
diamond key, said:

  "Riding on the ocean waves a magic ship I see;
  Stop and change thy course, O ship, here I hold the key.
  Obey the signal known to thee,
  And come at once direct to me."

The vessel turned right round and came at full speed towards land, and
right on to the bank, where it remained motionless.

Niezguinek smashed in the steel network with his club; and opening the
doors with the diamond key, there found Princess Sudolisu. He made her
unconscious with the herb Sleep, and lifting her before him on his
horse, said:

  "Marvel of strength and of beauty so white,
    Horse of my heart, while I sing,
  Swift as an arrow through space take thy flight
    Straight to the court of my king."

Then the horse, as if he saw some strange thing in the clouds, lifted
himself in the air and began to fly through space so rapidly that in
about two hours he had crossed rivers, mountains, and forests, and had
reached his journey's end.

Although Niezguinek had fallen violently in love with the princess
himself, he took her straight to the royal palace and introduced her
to the king.

Now she was so exquisitely beautiful that the monarch was quite
dazzled by looking at her, and being thus carried away by his
admiration, he put his arm round her as if to caress her: but she
rebuked him severely.

"What have I done to offend you, princess? Why do you treat me so
harshly?"

"Because in spite of your rank you are ill-bred. You neither ask my
name nor that of my parents, and you think to take possession of me as
if I were but a dog or a falcon. You must understand that he who would
be my husband must have triple youth, that of heart, soul, and body."

"Charming princess, if I could become young again we would be married
directly."

She replied, "But I have the means of making you so, and by help of
this sword in my hand. For with it I will pierce you to the heart,
then cut up your body into small pieces, wash them carefully, and join
them together again. And if I breathe upon them you will return to
life young and handsome, just as if you were only twenty years of
age."

"Oh indeed! I should like to know who would submit to that; first make
trial of Sir Niezguinek here."

The princess looked at him, whereupon he bowed and said, "Lovely
princess, I willingly submit, although I am young enough without it.
In any case life without you would be valueless."

Then the princess took a step towards him and killed him with her
sword. She cut him up in pieces and washed these in pure water, after
which she joined them together again and breathed upon them. Instantly
Niezguinek sprang up full of life and health, and looked so handsome
and bright that the old king, who was dreadfully jealous, exclaimed,
"Make me, too, young again, princess; do not lose a moment."

The princess pierced him to the heart with her sword, cut him up into
little pieces, and, opening the window, threw them out, at the same
time calling the king's dogs, who quickly ate them up. Then she turned
to Niezguinek and said, "Proclaim yourself king, and I will be your
queen."

He followed her advice, and within a short time they were married; his
brothers, whom he had pardoned, and his parents having been invited to
the wedding. On their way back from the church the magic sword
suddenly clinked, and, flashing in the air, divided itself into a
thousand swords that placed themselves on guard as sentinels all round
the palace. The guzla, too, began to play so sweetly and gaily that
every living thing began to dance for joy.

The festival was magnificent. I myself was there, and drank freely of
wine and mead; and although not a drop went into my mouth, my chin was
quite wet.




