THE SPIRIT OF THE STEPPES




In ancient days there lived a king and queen; the former was old but
the latter young. Although they loved one another dearly they were
very unhappy, for God had not given them any children. They fretted
and grieved about this so deeply that the queen became ill with
melancholy. The doctors advised her to travel. The king was obliged to
remain at home, so she went without him, accompanied by twelve maids
of honour, all beautiful and fresh as flowers in May. When they had
travelled for some days, they reached a vast uninhabited plain which
stretched so far away it seemed to touch the sky. After driving hither
and thither for some time the driver was quite bewildered, and stopped
before a large stone column. At its foot stood a warrior on horseback,
clad in steel armour.

"Brave knight, can you direct me to the high-road?" said the driver;
"we are lost, and know not which way to go."

"I will show you the way," said the warrior, "but only on one
condition, that each of you gives me a kiss."

The queen looked at the warrior in wrath, and ordered the coachman to
drive on. The carriage continued moving nearly all day, but as if
bewitched, for it always returned to the stone column. This time the
queen addressed the warrior.

"Knight," said she, "show us the road, and I will reward you richly."

"I am the Master Spirit of the Steppes," answered he. "I demand
payment for showing the way, and my payment is always in kisses."

"Very well, my twelve maids of honour shall pay you."

"Thirteen kisses are due to me; the first must be given by the lady
who addresses me."

The queen was very angry, and again the attempt was made to find their
way. But the carriage, though during the whole time it moved in an
opposite direction, still returned to the stone column. It was now
dark, and they were obliged to think of finding shelter for the night,
so the queen was obliged to give the warrior his strange payment.
Getting out of her carriage she walked up to the knight, and looking
modestly down allowed him to kiss her; her twelve maids of honour who
followed did the same. A moment later stone column and horseman had
vanished, and they found themselves on the high-road, while a perfumed
cloud seemed to float over the steppes. The queen stepped into her
carriage with her ladies, and so the journey was continued.

But from that day the beautiful queen and her maids became thoughtful
and sad; and, losing all pleasure in travel, went back to the capital.
Yet the return home did not make the queen happy, for always before
her eyes she saw the Horseman of the Steppes. This displeased the
king, who became gloomy and ill-tempered.

One day while the king was on his throne in the council chamber he
suddenly heard the sweetest warblings, like unto those produced by a
bird of paradise; these were answered by the songs of many
nightingales. Wondering, he sent to find out what it was. The
messenger returned saying that the queen and her twelve maids of
honour had each been presented with a girl baby, and that the sweet
warblings were but the crying of the children. The king was greatly
astonished, and while he was engaged in deep thought about the matter
the palace was suddenly lit up by lights of dazzling brightness. On
inquiring into the cause he learnt that the little princess had opened
her eyes, and that they shone with matchless brilliancy.

At first the king could not speak, so amazed was he. He laughed and he
cried, he sorrowed and he rejoiced, and in the midst of it all a
deputation of ministers and senators was announced. When these were
shown into his presence they fell on their knees, and striking the
ground with their foreheads, said, "Sire, save your people and your
royal person. The queen and her twelve maids of honour have been
presented by the Spirit of the Steppes with thirteen girl babies. We
beseech you to have these children killed, or we shall all be
destroyed."

The king, roused to anger, gave orders that all the babies should be
thrown into the sea. The courtiers were already on their way to obey
this cruel command when the queen entered, weeping, and pale as death.
She threw herself at the king's feet and begged him to spare the lives
of these helpless and innocent children, and instead to let them be
placed on a desert island and there left in the hands of God.

The king granted her wish. The baby princess was placed in a golden
cradle, her little companions in copper cradles, and the thirteen were
taken to a desert island and left quite alone. Every one at court
thought that they had perished, and said one to another, "They will
die from cold and hunger; they will be devoured by wild beasts, or
birds of prey; they are sure to die; perchance they will be buried
under dead leaves or covered with snow." But happily nothing of the
kind happened, for God takes care of little children.

The small princess grew bigger day by day. Every morning she was
awakened by the rising sun, and bathed by the dew. Soft breezes
refreshed her, and twisted into plaits her luxuriant hair. The trees
sang her to sleep with their rustling lullabies, the stars watched
over her at night. The swans clothed her in their soft raiment, and
the bees fed her with their honey. The beauty of the little maiden
increased with her growth. Her brow was calm and pure as the moon, her
lips red as a rosebud, and so eloquent that her voice sounded like a
shower of pearls. But wonderful beyond compare was the expressive
beauty of her eyes, for if she looked at you kindly you seemed to
float in a sea of joy, if angrily it made you numb with fear, and you
were instantly changed into a block of ice. She was waited upon by her
twelve companions, who were almost as charming as their mistress, to
whom they were devotedly attached. Rumours of the loveliness of
Princess Sudolisu spread far and wide. People came to see her from all
parts of the world, so that it was soon no longer a desert island, but
a thickly populated and magnificent city.

Many a prince came from afar and entered the lists as suitor for the
hand of Sudolisu, but none succeeded in winning her love. Those who
bore with good temper and resignation the disappointment of being
refused returned home safe and sound, but woe to the unlucky wretch
who rebelled against her will and attempted to use an armed force; his
soldiers perished miserably, while he, frozen to the heart by her
angry glance, was turned into a block of ice.

Now it happened that the famous ogre, Kostey, who lived underground,
was a great admirer of beauty. And he took it into his head to see
what the creatures above ground were doing. By the help of his
telescope he was able to observe all the kings and queens, princes and
princesses, gentlemen and ladies, living on the earth. As he was
looking his eye fell upon a beautiful island, where, bright as many
stars, stood twelve maidens; while in their midst, upon a couch of
swan's-down, slept a young princess lovely as the dawn of day.
Sudolisu was dreaming of a young knight who rode a spirited horse; on
his breast was a golden cuirass, and in his hand an invisible club.
And in her dream she admired this knight, and loved him more than life
itself. The wicked Kostey longed to have her for his own, and
determined to carry her off. He reached the earth by striking it from
underground three times with his forehead. The princess called her
army together, and putting herself at its head, led her soldiers
against him. But he merely breathed upon the soldiers and they fell
down in an overpowering sleep. Then he stretched out his bony hands to
take the princess, but she, throwing a glance full of anger and
disdain at him, changed him into a block of ice. Then she shut herself
up in her palace. Kostey did not remain frozen long; when the princess
had departed he came to life again, and started off in pursuit of her.
On reaching the town where she dwelt, he put all the inhabitants into
a charmed sleep, and laid the same spell upon the twelve maids of
honour. Fearing the power of her eyes, he dared not attack Sudolisu
herself; so he surrounded her palace with an iron wall, and left it in
charge of a monster dragon with twelve heads. Then he waited, in hope
that the princess would give in.

Days passed, weeks grew into months, and still Princess Sudolisu's
kingdom looked like one large bedchamber. The people snored in the
streets, the brave army lying in the fields slept soundly, hidden in
the long grass under the shadow of nettle, wormwood, and thistle, rust
and dust marring the brightness of their armour. Inside the palace
everything was the same. The twelve maids of honour lay motionless.
The princess alone kept watch, silent amid this reign of sleep. She
walked up and down her narrow prison, sighing and weeping bitter
tears, but no other sound broke the silence; only Kostey, avoiding her
glance, still called through the doors and begged her to refuse him no
longer. Then he promised she should be Queen of the Nether World, but
she answered him not.

Lonely and miserable, she thought of the prince of her dreams. She saw
him in his golden armour, mounted on his spirited steed, looking at
her with eyes full of love. So she imagined him day and night.

Looking out of window one day, and seeing a cloud floating on the
horizon, she cried:

  "Floating Cloudlet soft and white,
    Pilgrim of the sky,
  I pray you for one moment, light
    On me your pitying eye.
  Where my love is can you tell?
  Thinks he of me ill or well?"

"I know not," answered the cloud, "ask the wind."

Then she saw a tiny breeze playing among the field flowers, and called
out:

  "Gentle Breezelet, soul of air,
    Look not lightly on my pain;
  Kindly lift me from despair,
    Help me freedom to regain.
  Where my love is can you tell?
  Thinks he of me ill or well?"

"Ask that little star yonder," answered the breeze, "she knows more
than I."

Sudolisu raised her beautiful eyes to the twinkling stars and said:

  "Shining Star, God's light on high,
    Look down and prithee see;
  Behold me weep and hear me sigh,
    Then help and pity me.
  Where my love is canst thou tell?
  Thinks he of me ill or well?"

"You will learn more from the moon," answered the star; "she lives
nearer the earth than I, and sees everything that goes on there."

The moon was just rising from her silver bed when Sudolisu called to
her:

  "Pearl of the Sky, thou radiant Moon,
    Thy watch o'er the stars pray leave,
  Throw thy soft glance o'er the earth ere I swoon,
    O'ercome by my sorrows I weep and I grieve.
  I pine for my friend, oh ease thou my heart,
  And say, am I loved? In his thoughts have I part?"

"Princess," replied the moon, "I know nothing of your friend. But wait
a few hours, the sun will have then risen; he knows everything, and
will surely be able to tell you."

So the princess kept her eyes fixed upon that part of the sky where
the sun first appears, chasing away the darkness like a flock of
birds. When he came forth in all his glory she said:

  "Soul of the World, thou deep fountain of life,
    Eye of all-powerful God,
  Visit my prison, dark scene of sad strife,
    Raise up my soul from the sod,
  With hope that my friend whom I pine for and love
  May come to my rescue. Say, where does he rove?"

"Sweet Sudolisu," answered the sun, "dry the tears that like pearls
roll down your sad and lovely face. Let your troubled heart be at
peace, for your friend the prince is now on his way to rescue you. He
has recovered the magic ring from the Nether World, and many armies
from those countries have assembled to follow him. He is now moving
towards Kostey's palace, and intends to punish him. But all this will
be of no avail, and Kostey will gain the victory, if the prince does
not make use of other means which I am now on my way to provide him
with. Farewell; be brave, he whom you love will come to your aid and
save you from Kostey and his sorceries; happiness is in store for you
both."

The sun then rose upon a distant land where Prince Junak, mounted on a
powerful steed and clad in golden armour, assembled his forces to
fight against the giant Kostey. Thrice he had dreamt of the beautiful
princess shut up in the Sleeping Palace, for the fame of her
loveliness had reached him, and he loved without having seen.

"Leave your army where it is," said the sun, "it will not be of the
slightest use in fighting against Kostey, he is proof against all
weapons. The only way to rescue the princess is to kill him, and there
is but one who can tell you how to do it, and that is the witch, old
Yaga. I will show you how to find the horse that will carry you
straight to her. First take the road to the east, and walk on till you
come to a wide plain: there, right in the middle of the plain, are
three oaks, and in the centre of these, lying close to the ground, is
an iron door with a copper handle. Behind the door is the horse, also
an invisible club; both are necessary for the work you have to do. You
will learn the rest afterwards. Farewell."

This advice astonished the prince greatly; he hardly knew what to do.
After deep reflection he crossed himself, took the magic ring from his
finger and cast it into the sea. Instantly the army vanished like mist
before the wind, and when not a trace of it was left he took the road
to the east. After walking straight on for eight days he reached a
large green plain, in the middle of which grew the three oaks, and in
the centre of these, close to the ground, was the iron door with the
copper handle. Opening the door, he found a winding staircase which
led to a second door bound with iron, and shut by means of a huge
padlock sixty pounds in weight. At this moment he heard the neighing
of a horse, the sound being followed by the opening of eleven other
iron doors. There he saw the war-horse which centuries ago had been
bewitched by a magician. The prince whistled; the horse immediately
bounded towards him, at the same time breaking the twelve iron chains
that fastened him to the manger. He was a beautiful creature, strong,
light, handsome, full of fire and grace; his eyes flashed lightnings,
from his nostrils came flames of fire, his mane was like a cloud of
gold, he was certainly a marvel of a horse.

"Prince Junak," said the steed, "I have waited centuries for such a
knight as you; here I am, ready to carry you and serve you faithfully.
Mount upon my back, and take hold of the invisible club that hangs at
the pommel of the saddle. You yourself will not need to use it; give
it your orders, it will carry them out and do the fighting itself. Now
we will start; may God look after us! Tell me where you wish to go,
and you shall be there directly."

The prince quickly told the horse his history, mounted, seized the
club, and set off. The creature capered, galloped, flew, and swam in
the air higher than the highest forests but lower than the clouds; he
crossed mountains, rivers, and precipices; he barely touched the
blades of grass in passing over them, and went so lightly along the
roads that he did not raise one grain of dust.

Towards sunset Junak found himself close to an immense forest, in the
centre of which stood Yaga's house. All around were oaks and pines
hundreds of years old, untouched by the axe of man. These enormous
trees, lit up by the rays of the setting sun, seemed to look with
astonishment at their strange guest. The silence was absolute; not a
bird sang in the branches, not an insect hummed in the air, not a worm
crawled upon the ground. The only sound was that made by the horse as
he broke through the underwood. Then they came in sight of a small
house supported by a cock's foot, round which it turned as on a
movable pivot. Prince Junak cried:

  "Turn round, little house, turn round,
    I want to come inside;
  Let thy back to the forest be found,
    Thy door to me open wide."

The little house turned round, and the prince entering saw old Yaga,
who immediately cried out, "What, Prince Junak! How have you come
here, where no one ever enters?"

"You are a silly old witch, to worry me with questions instead of
making me welcome," said the prince.

At these words old Yaga jumped up and hastened to attend to his needs.
She prepared food and drink, made him a soft bed where he could sleep
comfortably, and then leaving the house passed the night out of doors.
On her return in the morning the prince related all his adventures and
confided his plans.

"Prince Junak," said she, "you have undertaken a very difficult task,
but your courage will enable you to accomplish it successfully. I will
tell you how to kill Kostey, for without that you can do nothing. Now,
in the very midst of the ocean lies the Island of Eternal Life. Upon
this island is an oak tree, and at the foot of it, hidden in the
earth, a coffer bound with iron. A hare is shut up in this coffer, and
under her sits a grey duck whose body contains an egg. Within this egg
is Kostey's life--if it be broken he dies. Good-bye, Prince Junak,
start without loss of time. Your horse will carry you to the island."

Junak mounted his horse, spoke a few words to him, and the brave
creature fled through space with the swiftness of an arrow. Leaving
the forest and its enormous trees behind, they soon reached the shores
of the ocean. Fishermen's nets lay on the beach, and in one of them
was a large sea fish who, struggling to free itself, spoke to the
prince in a human voice.

"Prince Junak," he said sadly, "free me from my prison; I assure you
you will lose nothing by doing me this service."

Junak did what was required of him, and threw the fish back into the
water. It plunged and disappeared, but he paid little attention to it,
so occupied was he with his own thoughts. In the far distance could be
seen the rocks of the Island of Eternal Life, but there seemed no way
of reaching it. Leaning on his club he thought and thought, and ever
as he thought he grew sadder and sadder.

"What is the matter, Prince Junak? Has anything vexed you?" asked his
horse.

"How can I help grieving when, while in sight of the island, I can go
no further? How can we cross the sea?"

"Get on my back, prince, I will be your bridge; only take care to hold
on tight."

The prince held firmly to its mane, and the horse leapt into the sea.
At first they were plunged right beneath the waves, but rising again
to the surface swam easily across. The sun was about to set when the
prince dismounted on the Island of Eternal Life. He first took off his
horse's harness, and leaving him to browse on the green grass, hurried
to the top of a distant hill, whence he could see a large oak. Without
losing a moment he hastened towards it, seized the tree with both
hands, pulled at it with all his might, and after the most violent
efforts tore it up by the roots from the place it had filled for
centuries. The tree groaned and fell, and the hole in which it had
been planted appeared like an immense case. Right at the bottom of
this case was a coffer bound with iron. The prince took it up, broke
the lock by striking it with a stone, opened it and seized the hare
that was trying to make its escape. The grey duck that had lain
underneath flew off towards the sea: the prince fired, struck the
bird, the latter dropped its egg into the sea, and both were swallowed
by the waves. Junak gave a cry of despair and rushed to the beach. At
first he could see nothing. After a few minutes there was a slight
movement of the waves, while upon the surface swam the fish whose life
he had saved. It came towards him, right on to the sand, and dropping
the lost egg at his feet, said: "You see, prince, I have not forgotten
your kindness, and now I have found it in my power to be of service to
you."

Having thus spoken it disappeared in the water. The prince took the
egg, mounted his horse, and crossing the sea with his heart full of
hope, journeyed towards the island where Princess Sudolisu kept watch
over her sleeping subjects in the Enchanted Palace. The latter was
surrounded by a wall, and guarded by the Dragon with Twelve Heads. Now
these heads went to sleep in turn, six at a time, so it was impossible
to take him unawares or to kill him, for that could be done only by
his own blows.

On reaching the palace gates Junak sent his invisible club forward to
clear the way, whereupon it threw itself upon the dragon, and began to
beat all the heads unmercifully. The blows came so thick and fast that
the body was soon crushed to pieces. Still the dragon lived and beat
the air with its claws. Then it opened its twelve jaws from which
darted pointed tongues, but it could not lay hold of the invisible
club. At last, tormented on all sides and filled with rage, it buried
its sharp claws in its own body and died. The prince then entered the
palace gates, and having put his faithful horse in the stables and
armed himself with his invisible club, made his way for the tower in
which the princess was shut up. On seeing him she cried out, "Prince,
I rejoiced to see your victory over the dragon. There is yet a more
terrible foe to conquer, and he is my jailor, the cruel Kostey. Beware
of him, for if he should kill you, I shall throw myself out of window
into the precipice beneath."

"Be comforted, my princess: for in this egg I hold the life or death
of Kostey."

Then turning to the invisible club, he said, "Press forward, my
invisible club; strike your best, and rid the earth of this wicked
giant."

The club began by breaking down the iron doors, and thus reached
Kostey. The giant was soon so crippled with blows that his teeth were
smashed, lightnings flashed from his eyes, and he rolled round and
round like a pin-cushion. Had he been a man he must have died under
such treatment. But he was no man, this master of sorcery. So he
managed to get on his feet and look for his tormentor. The blows from
the club rained hard upon him all the time, and with such effect that
his groans could be heard all over the island. On approaching the
window he saw Prince Junak.

"Ah, wretch!" cried the ogre, "it is you, is it, who torments me in
this way!" and he prepared to blow upon him with his poisonous breath.
But the prince instantly crushed the egg between his hands, the shell
broke, the white and yellow mingled and flowed to the ground, and
Kostey died.

As the sorcerer breathed his last, the enchantments vanished and the
sleeping islanders awoke. The army, once more afoot, advanced with
beating drums to the palace, and everything fell into its accustomed
place. As soon as Princess Sudolisu was freed from her prison she held
out her white hand to her deliverer, and thanking him in the most
touching words, led him to the throne and placed him at her side. The
twelve maids of honour having chosen young and brave warriors, ranged
themselves with their lovers round the queen. Then the doors were
thrown open, and the priests in their robes entered, bearing a golden
tray of wedding rings. Thereupon the marriage ceremony was gone
through, and the lovers united in God's name.

After the wedding there were feasting and music and dancing, as is
usual on such occasions, and they all enjoyed themselves. It makes one
glad to think how happy they were, and what a glorious time they had
after their misfortunes.




