Another Encounter








The goddess mounted her blue phoenix, flew over the fort, seized Li
Ching, and carried him to her cave. There she made him kneel before
her, and reminded him how she had protected him that he might gain
honour and glory on earth before he attained to immortality. "It is
thus that you show your gratitude--by killing my servant!"

Li Ching swore that he was innocent; but the tell-tale arrow was
there, and it could not but have come from the fortress. Li Ching
begged the goddess to set him at liberty, in order that he might find
the culprit and bring him to her. "If I cannot find him," he added,
"you may take my life."

Once again No-cha frankly admitted his deed to his father, and followed
him to the cave of Shih-chi Niang-niang. When he reached the entrance
the second servant reproached him with the crime, whereupon No-cha
struck him a heavy blow. Shih-chi Niang-niang, infuriated, threw
herself at No-cha, sword in hand; one after the other she wrenched
from him his bracelet and magic trousers.

Deprived of his magic weapons, No-cha fled to his master, T'ai-i
Chen-jen. The goddess followed and demanded that he be put to
death. A terrible conflict ensued between the two champions, until
T'ai-i Chen-jen hurled into the air his globe of nine fire-dragons,
which, falling on Shih-chi Niang-niang, enveloped her in a whirlwind
of flame. When this had passed it was seen that she was changed
into stone.

"Now you are safe," said T'ai-i Chen-jen to No-cha, "but return
quickly, for the Four Dragon-kings have laid their accusation before
Yue Huang, and they are going to carry off your parents. Follow my
advice, and you will rescue your parents from their misfortune."









