The Master Rescued








Sun and the Demons now began to wrangle about the respective merits
of their gourds, which, each assured the other, could imprison men
and make them obey their wishes. Finally, Sun succeeded in putting
one of the Demons into his gourd.

There ensued another fight concerning the magic sword and palm fan,
during which the fan was burnt to ashes. After more encounters Sun
succeeded in bottling the second Demon in the magic vase, and sealed
him up with the seal of the Ancient of Days. Then the magic sword
was delivered, and the Demons submitted. Sun returned to the cave,
fetched his Master out, swept the cave clean of all evil spirits, and
they then started again on their westward journey. On the road they
met a blind man, who addressed them saying: "Whither away, Buddhist
Priest? I am the Ancient of Days. Give me back my magic treasures. In
the gourd I keep the pills of immortality. In the vase I keep the
water of life. The sword I use to subdue demons. With the fan I stir
up enthusiasm. With the cord I bind bundles. One of these two Demons
had charge of the gold crucible. They stole my magic treasures and
fled to the mundane sphere of mortals. You, having captured them,
are deserving of great reward." But Sun replied: "You should be
severely punished for allowing your servants to do this evil in the
world." The Ancient of Days replied: "No, without these trials your
Master and his disciples could never attain to perfection."

Sun understood and said: "Since you have come in person for the magic
treasures, I return them to you." After receiving them, the Ancient
of Days returned to his T'ai Sui mansion in the skies.










