The Feast of Peaches








Hsi Wang Mu's palace is situated in the high mountains of the snowy
K'un-lun. It is 1000 _li_ (about 333 miles) in circuit; a rampart of
massive gold surrounds its battlements of precious stones. Its right
wing rises on the edge of the Kingfishers' River. It is the usual
abode of the Immortals, who are divided into seven special categories
according to the colour of their garments--red, blue, black, violet,
yellow, green, and 'nature-colour.' There is a marvellous fountain
built of precious stones, where the periodical banquet of the
Immortals is held. This feast is called P'an-t'ao Hui, 'the Feast of
Peaches.' It takes place on the borders of the Yao Ch'ih, Lake of Gems,
and is attended by both male and female Immortals. Besides several
superfine meats, they are served with bears' paws, monkeys' lips,
dragons' liver, phoenix marrow, and peaches gathered in the orchard,
endowed with the mystic virtue of conferring longevity on all who
have the good luck to taste them. It was by these peaches that the
date of the banquet was fixed. The tree put forth leaves once every
three thousand years, and it required three thousand years after that
for the fruit to ripen. These were Hsi Wang Mu's birthdays, when all
the Immortals assembled for the great feast, "the occasion being more
festive than solemn, for there was music on invisible instruments,
and songs not from mortal tongues."









